 And I get several feelings there. One is that you‚Äôre a little fearful that I will think, ‚ÄúOh, that‚Äôs not an important problem.‚Äù And another one is that, uh, uhm, you have a very definite goal for yourself and sometimes you achieve it and feel good, but then it cycles that‚Äôs very discouraging. And I was interested that when you reach as much weight as you have now, it‚Äôs not just a feeling of, of, uh, dissatisfaction, uh, you use a stronger word than that, uh, despair. Did you use despair?
 Helplessness, helplessness. Yeah.
 You really feel helpless.   But you ...
 ‚ÄúYou stupid person, why can‚Äôt you, why can‚Äôt you maintain your weight.‚Äù You feel that way.
  So it isn‚Äôt as though you haven‚Äôt tried.  You look at your childhood and you‚Äôve tried different behavioral methods and you tried this and you tried that.  You‚Äôve really put a lot of effort into it.
  I‚Äôm sure you‚Äôve had some satisfaction.  You‚Äôre not as fat as your father.
 It doesn‚Äôt really give you much satisfaction.
 But. . .What?
  Uh huh. Yeah. Sometimes the reasonable thing seems to be, ‚ÄúAll right I‚Äôll accept it, that I go up and down, that I have somewhat of a weight.‚Äù   Sometimes it feels the reasonable thing just to accept it  and say, ‚ÄúYes, I go up and down. And I‚Äôm a little over weight.‚Äù  But, and then you say, ‚ÄúWell, no, I don‚Äôt want to accept it.‚Äù  
  So, ‚ÄúHe can‚Äôt help me either.‚Äù
 And that‚Äôs further helplessness.
 That‚Äôs further helplessness. If. . .
 If I‚Äôm helpless too then. . . 
 It‚Äôs, it‚Äôs okay.
 I understand. You said it‚Äôs a fight against yourself. And I add to  that something you said before, it almost sounds as though at those moments you almost hate yourself.
 You call yourself names?
 Mhm. You call yourself bad names.
  I just wondered if you called yourself bad names at those points.
 Stupid or bad or ...
 Mhm. And so that is real anger at yourself  and also kind of a despairing anger.
 When you‚Äôre at the bottom of the curve that‚Äôs fine, everything‚Äôs great. Then up it goes again.  
 You‚Äôve been over it and over it and over it.
 And nothing new comes. 
 When your trousers get tight then you know you‚Äôve gained too much.
  When you start measuring  clothing.   
 You‚Äôve already gone over the things you already know and now you want to change it.
 Been over all that kind of thing.
 I think you wanted to change the theme and I‚Äôm interested in that. 
 You know that what you‚Äôve said already  you‚Äôve covered time and again and I guess I‚Äôm interested just as you are in ...  So what is the next theme?
 Mhm-hm. I understand that. Mhm-hm.
 You don‚Äôt know anything definite.
 You just know you want to change it.
 But what you‚Äôre saying, it‚Äôs sounds like to me, is you‚Äôre actually pushing the ball up the mountain all the time, it goes back down and you  what do you do about it,  you don‚Äôt do anything.
 Yeah.
 So maybe you‚Äôre 
 Uh-huh. Mhm-hm.  I‚Äôm almost the same as you are.   Pushing it up the mountain, pushing up the mountain and never getting there.
 So you‚Äôre telling me, ‚ÄúMaybe you‚Äôre just as bad as I am.‚Äù
 Maybe as two human beings each of us have burdens that are very troublesome.
 And what?
 Unsolved problems. Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. 
 You feel yourself sort of running away, is that?
 One thing that comes to my mind is, I‚Äôve always thought of Sisyphus as having a lot of courage.
 And this was a . . . ?
 Paradox.
 Paradoxical?
 Paradoxical, yeah.  You must think of Sisyphus as a happy person.
 Is it funny?
 I‚Äôm not sure that I‚Äôm understanding you correctly there. But it would sound as though you‚Äôre saying, Sisyphus in his eternal and seemingly unsuccessful labors is nevertheless a happy person acceptant of his fate. And are you saying, ‚Äúand perhaps so am I?‚Äù
 In one sense.   Can you say, uh, or actually, say, say some more about that.
 Perhaps you are Sisyphus.  Perhaps, perhaps you are a happy man without knowing it.   You‚Äôre saying maybe the thing to do is accept the ups and downs.     I‚Äôm not sure, uh, I‚Äôm not sure if I know what changes that would make in you.
 Not quite. We still have a few minutes.  I don‚Äôt, I didn‚Äôt understand the last phrase. It‚Äôs still as open as before ‚Ä¶?
 Maybe there‚Äôd be less fighting and less self, less fighting of yourself and less self-condemnation and more acceptance. Is that what you‚Äôre saying?
 So to what extent do you accept her criteria?
  So she supports the side of you that just feels bad to be . 
 Mhm-hm. 
 Not severe. 
 I  I come closer to accepting it. 
 But I noticed you looked at my belly. 
 As you get really older it decreases. 
 I guess we should stop. But I think you agree that we‚Äôre both Sisyphus?   Anything more you want to say?
 Okay.
 Wait a minute. You may want to think a minute or two, but then I‚Äôd like you to say how it, how it seemed to you maybe.  
 In a minute I‚Äôll tell how I felt about it. But I‚Äôd be interested in hearing all the reactions that you had in the interview.
 I see.  That went a little too far, is that what you‚Äôre saying? 
 Okay.
 And I think you corrected me on that.
 Suggestion.
 Mhm-hm. .
 Were you troubled by the silences?
 Do you have anything more you want to say about your side of it?
 Do you have anything more that you want to say about your views of the interview?
 Well, I think, I don‚Äôt have a great deal to add to that. I felt too that, uhm, uh, I made the same kind of mistakes a lot one makes in the early part of the as you say.  I thought perhaps this is one aspect of a larger self-hate but you corrected me on that.  And, uh, as you talked about your ups and downs and soon as you got to Sisyphus, I find that when a, when a client begins to use a metaphor, okay. He‚Äôs in something that has a lot of meaning for him.  And, uh, so I was quick to use that, that metaphor. Uh, I didn‚Äôt feel that, uh, that it came with any great new insights except that you became a little more acceptant of the fact that  you‚Äôre going to be up and down and up and down and up and down.    Uh, you are going to be Sisyphus and, and, uh, and I was much moved when you quoted the last sentence, ‚ÄúSo perhaps Sisyphus is a, is a happy man.‚Äù Uh,  and I, I always have a poor memory for an interview so the rest of you can correct me. But I think it‚Äôs when you, when you said, ‚ÄúI‚Äôve been over all this. I don‚Äôt have any place further to go.  I want to change the theme.‚Äù  And you didn‚Äôt know where to change it to.  I think that‚Äôs when you brought up Sisyphus.     It had a lot of meaning for you.
 Um, just sitting across from me makes it very different from another situation.  You feel, now, I’m some sort of a frightening specter.
 I didn’t look so scary before.
 But you’d like to be partly the quiet self that you were first, and partly the, uh, dominant or strong self that you are ordinarily.
 Dominant in what way?
 You’re not quite clear.  You feel dominant in this relationship?
 O.K.
 Inside you feel it.  O.K.
 So, do you have a lot of reservations about this strong capable and dominant side of yourself?
 Uh huh.  And yet, feel maybe that you should be in a place where that’s an asset and not a  liability.
 Dubiously.
 Building up to the silent aspect...
 aspects, so that you felt...
 But a speculation on all this is that, uh, you’re surpressing the stronger, more dominant side of yourself, and it came out physically.
 That’s what you’d like to find, is some place in between where you’d really be comfortable with yourself.
 So that, even the, even the desire to change is new for you.
 Uh huh.  You really would like some..
 Somebody to give you some answers as to how to, how to implement this new self that you, that you’d like.
 All you know is that right now you’d like some outside help in “How can I achieve the balance that I’ve now come to desire?”
 And you’d just welcome some answers from the outside.
 Where, your heart?
 So, that’s one thing you’re pretty darn sure of.  That you wanna drop and leave behind the person you have been.
 Not all of it.
 O.K.
 Uh huh.
 Uh, that sort of strikes me.  You thought that part of you might die?
 Would you mourn that part if it died?
 Well, I guess, uh, you really like most of yourself, and I gather you don’t want to be entirely rid even of that dominant part.
 Balance.  That’s right.  And that rests somewhere right in your heart.
 The possibility of that showing.
 That’s right.  You don’t...
 But, you’re sick of being depended on in that kind of a way.
 Right this instant.
 It’s gone completely blank.
 I wonder, what you’ll be writing on it.
 O.K.
 You like it better as a white sheet?
 New?
 No starch.  You’re saying it’s clean, it’s white, it’s fresh, it smells well, it’s soft, not starchy or stiff.  Sounds nice.
 You’re afraid...
 Of the silence.  Hm.  You feel there should be some sound going between us.
 What will the group think?
 You were able to try yourself out more, here, without a lot of the pressures you felt back home.
 How can you tell people to “Fuck off and let me be who I am?”
 Maybe, maybe that’s the answer; that there is no way without an internal struggle?
 Ammunition for...
 O.K. You’ll get support for your...
 I’m having trouble relating what you’re saying now with that soft, white sheet world.
 But that sounds useful.
 What you want to do is to be able to change in the real world.
 Somehow change in the real world doesn’t have the right tone to it.
 So you weren’t really comfortable with yourself when you were being a different self.
 So, the energy is always there, and it’s a question of how are you going to use it.
 So you came here and why you came here.
 You’re lost, and how do you find your true direction?
 Your voice sounds really confident.
 You don’t like the confidant, dominant you?
 Confidence yes, but dominance no.
 A clue even.
 But that doesn’t stop you from wanting.
 It doesn’t stop you from wanting it.
 Somehow, if I would only give you a little push in the right direction, maybe a little suggestion.  Point the direction.
 I find myself listening to your voice, there, and the voice sounds as though “None of this is very important.”  And yet, I think it is a...
 You’re accustomed to running in very determined channels.
 You don’t want to be the organiser, you want to be one of the players.
 So, you’re saying your mother was the model for this organizing self.  Is that what you’re...
 It sounds like you’re asking yourself that, as well as me.  Don’t you see?
 Because you are sick of this dialogue in yourself.  That really hit me.
 Yeah, yeah.
 And is it dumb to have that kind of dialogue going on?
 I'm wondering, that may account for the lightness of your voice that really you feel it is dumb.  I don't know.  Do you?
 So that part of it is thoroughly serious.
 You want to change.
 I feel a little baffled by you.  And I don't know why.
  Let me try to figure it out.  I think, partly, it's the, it's the difference between the lightness of your voice, and the humor and so on, and yet …
 [No therapist response available in transcripts]
 Yes.
 You mean it isn't so much the verbal versus the non-verbal.  It's the tone versus the content, I guess, or something like that.
 It seems to me you're telling me of various ways in which you have started, your silence here, your difference with, in the way you bring up your daughter.  I'm not quite sure…
 O.K.
 Those things are…
 You were being real in trying out a new aspect…
 … of yourself.  But, um, nevertheless, you're pretty hard on yourself for that was stupid; it was… you were doing dumb things.
 O.K.
 Not giving you anything, God damn it.
 You're just as frustrated as hell.
 And irritated.
 O.K.
 Explode pretty quick.
 Now, there you did it again.  I was beginning to feel that you, that what you're saying was very real, and certainly the idea of something hidden was very real.  And then, well no that …
 It sounds as though inside you did.
 O.K.
 O.K., O.K.  O.K.
" Inside you were saying, ""God damn it!  Do something!"""
 You feel really powerless unless I give you some clue as to how you go about it.
" ""Please, show me the direction that my life should go."""
 Please show me the first step.
 I don't know whether you'd believe it, but if I could tell you that first step to take I would.
 And you haven't found the way you'd like, and what I hear, even deeper, is that you feel pretty damned irritated that I don't give you some little help.
 That's what your mind tells you, but that's not what your gut tells you.
" Your gut says, ""I can't do it without, unless you help me."""
 I know.
" It's a generalized ""you"" in a way."
" Unless ""you"" somebody…"
 gives me some help I cannot do it myself.
 That doesn't sound very dominant.
" There you're saying, ""I can't do it myself.  I am powerless without some help from outside."""
 Is that what you're fearful of?
 But, you didn't have trouble asking me for help.
 I'm a, I'm a…
 I'm a helper.
 I guess…
 Yeah.
 And I'm not doing it.
" That's the way I thought you were going to finish the sentence when you said you were afraid.  You ended it, ""I'm afraid to ask.""  I thought you were going to say, and now you are saying, ""I'm afraid to take the steps…"""
 unsupported.
 Now I'm seeing the whole different side of you.
" Which isn't dominant at all.  What you're saying is, ""I can't do it alone.  Please help."""
" ""I can't possibly take that first step by myself all alone, unsupported.  Please, somebody, help."""
 And that really touches something.
 You're too scared…
 I feel so much more real in my relationship with you than a little while ago.
 Too scared to ask… for the help.
 But, you asked really without fear, for help.  That isn't what touched you.  It was the notion of being frightened to take that first step alone.    This is a hell of a time to say so, but we've got to stop in a minute…
 Can you even begin to say what those tears are about?
 
 So to show the weak side of yourself.
 “I really I am not dumb, and I'm not strong.”
 “I need help, and I want help.”
 “But I'm scared to death to ask.”
 That's the other side of you.
 Can we sign off?
 Just stay here, give yourself a little chance to rest a minute.    When you feel ready to, and I can talk for a while if you don't feel ready to, I'd like you to say how the interview seemed to you.  I think that people would be interested to know.  Maybe you'd like to think about that for a while.
 Well I really, all I can say is things I've said in the interview, I guess.  I really did feel baffled by you for quite a period of time, and felt that our relationship wasn't as real as I like to have it.  And then gradually it began to seem more and more real.  And I felt that we were making progress which would lead to a step…
 I'm sure.
 I love that.    Because I often think exactly that.  
 I guess the other side of the coin to me, there is, that, I do so much with so little, and that little is vastly important.
   You sound very frightened and almost despairing.  You're, you're just continually in danger of technology, and arms.
   So it is both a feeling of hopelessness and a feeling that ah-- we might all be destroyed tomorrow.
   Does it make any sense to try to do constructive things when it may all be blown up?
   You ask yourself is it really worth living under such a, such a terrible situation?  It really does make you contemplate suicide.
     So your one desire seems so reasonable and normal and yet, uh, you feel you can’t have children in this terrible world.  And you are cut off from any of the constructive outcomes that you really would like.
     I'm concerned because there are two things that I want to do: I want to ask someone to let me know when 25 minutes has gone by.  You will be a timekeeper?    Just let me know.  And I also want to take off my jacket.  I didn't realize it would be so warm.  Can you hold this for me?    I'm a little sorry for the interruption, but I do realize: Personally you are working toward constructive things, but it's like having to swim through water or something to, to get there, so many obstacles, so much, so much potential difficulty in a way.
    You are a strong person, but in this situation all your strength is sapped away.
    Mm, hmm.  You were human enough to let your attention stray for a minute and an accident happened.  And it might happen to one of them.
     With much more disastrous results.
   What the hell can I do?  I feel completely blocked, so to speak.
    Paralyzed.
   So that you could lighten the surface sometimes, but down…  deep there are the same feelings of apprehension and, and hopelessness…
   So you feel your emotional needs are not unreasonable or impossible or anything.  They could be met.  But here it's against the context of more and more arms, and more and more destructiveness all around you.
   It sounds to me as though you are saying: I am a healthy person, but I am in a sick situation.
   It almost brings tears to your eyes, doesn't it?  Thinking of the fact, that we might destroy this beautiful, wonderful universe.  We are the first generation who can do it.
   It just fills you with tears to think of the tragedy of it, and how little you feel you can do about it.
   Saying, I can try to be strong but to what, to what purpose?
   You are a strong person, but not strong enough to live in that situation!
   If what?
   Here you are in your work trying to give hope to people and yet, within yourself you feel: Is there hope?
   Feel people you know, and perhaps you too, are making efforts, but will it change anything significant at all?
   What you want is for people to be in touch with their feelings about it, not just talk, talk, talk about it!  Mm, hmm.  A-, and you have, had hopes that perhaps here you might find something in the way of at least steps toward change!
  You feel there might be value even if we were all afraid together.    At least that would be in touch with the feelings not just the intellect.
   Just to know that others are as despairing and afraid as you are would be a support, somehow.     You wouldn't feel so alone.
  Mm, hmm.  Mm, hmm.  Somehow have to keep your feet on the ground somehow, or touching something that's real.  And I guess the thing that most likely would be to touch something that's real in other people, too.
  You do have a belief that if people could really be in touch with each other genuinely on a deep level, that might accomplish something.
  It wouldn't be smooth but it would be real.
  Yeah, but they're all so separated from the consequences of their actions that, uh that, this makes it incredibly impersonal.
  One thing that comes through in almost everything you say is how much you dislike the abstract, the intellectual.  Fearing it all in a realm so distant from the realness of people.
  Yeah, from life!
  That's why you welcome the simplicity of your neighbor.   Just being real.  And in touch with you.
   So even here you are disappointed in the, in the intellectual quality, the abstract quality of the fact that people are up in the heads.
   It is just an absurdly contradictory situation, in which we-- people say one thing and do a complete opposite.
  You feel…  I'm sort of at the end of my rope, sort of the end of my rope and I don't see how I can go further and -- I feel if I went further I might just break up, in some way, crack up.
  You are really afraid personally, of what might happen to you if you delve anymore deeply into these feelings.
  Your feeling of fear is just deep, and real, and very present for you.
   So just to share your fears with someone who can accept them, uh, it doesn't block you from expressing, makes you feel younger? Better?  More elevated?
  There you could feel this appreciation of how beautiful our world is, and how marvelous it is   And then the thought comes: Yes, but it might be vaporized any moment.  And it's the thoughts that are very tough to live with.  
  It's just a plea: I, I love life, I want to live.  I want to be alive.
   Life is so rich, and so full, and so marvelous, and yet, there is always that fear hanging over you.  
  You really appreciate being with me and my being with you.
  I appreciate being with you.
  You've said all you can say.  Does that, mean you'd like to stop?
  Okay, okay.
  Makes?
"  This was a very uh, moving interview for me, because I feel that Beate is speaking for so many others that uh, it was very touching.  And uh, I was, I am moved by her statement that ""even if we were just afraid together"" that might be of some help.  Just being human with each other, sharing our feelings, somehow takes away the edge of the despair.  And uh, I certainly didn't plan to, and I'm sure you didn't either but, to discover some easy or quick solution, but I do feel that uh, to me it seemed like a good relationship, an open relationship.  Uh, I gradually felt more and more at ease in moving around in your world and, and sensing what your world is like.  I guess somehow, one thing that, uh, also was very moving to me, because I have six grandchildren and three great-grandchildren, was when you said that you have to take care of your dog, because you didn't feel you could bring children into a world like this.  Um, that was very, very moving."
  Okay, let's get some reactions…
  It has a lot of meaning to me, Beate, that your situation is so, so awful, that it came to the point where you could really understand the feelings of the terrorists: just destroy.
  You wouldn't do it, but it did become understandable.   Also she  spoke not only of the indifference of people, but of the fact that they are afraid to face their own feelings.  Their own feelings are so awful that it is easier to, shut them out entirely.  I think that's a very real part of the situation.
  It seems incredible to you that we could go through that experience time and again.
 1-2-2-3-3-3-4-4-4-4-5-5-5-5-5.
 Even though you may have a better picture of the way this has worked in you –
 Still – what did that give you?
 You want to keep it close –
 Kind of like to see the way this pattern fits –
 I’m not entirely sure I’m getting the feeling there – let’s see if I am – that whether in the argument with your wife or your experience here yesterday ah – that you feel that you are being disapproved of or might be disapproved of for ah – these disapprovable thoughts and feelings and actions – then – that – if it’s a strong enough – can really, really bring a kind of a panicky feeling –
 And – an aspect of that is that – “well maybe now I’m being regarded as a label – a sexual deviate or some other term”.
  - and therefore that just brings –“ well the rejection that comes would just be proof that I am labeled”.
 I understand – it’s as though ah - it’s as though you’d stepped out of being you – you’re no longer you – a person or something – you’re now this different category – I mean you’ve crossed the line and you’re –
 That is a risk that an – “an act can just place me in a totally different category which ah” –
 A lot of things might lead up to it – they might be in that direction – but then it’s something discoverable that could – ah – really place you over the line.
 I guess I really do get the flavor of that – now bringing that incident – “what should I do about these things?  Here these are my perceptions of my parents standards – the ‘Hot Tamale’ incident I became a thief – now probably they didn’t view it that way but that’s my feeling about it” –
 “They’re a little more human and tolerant than I have really ah- perceived them to be in my feelings, yet it’s also true there is a point beyond which they really disagree-“
 But your feelings still say “But I should punish myself”
 These are the only alternatives that ah – ah – seem feasible are either to change the standards by which you judge yourself – and inflict punishment – or to change the actions that – ah – seem to bring about that –
 In all of your kind of real-life interaction and profession- professional thinking or anything – the notion of a perfect standard doesn’t really make sense-
 So that really you are demanding perfection of yourself – and punishing yourself if you don’t live up to it – would that be the case?
 “Perhaps it’s okay – I can see that what I have been doing emotionally is unreasonable – but ah that didn’t root it out” –
 Do you catch that even when you say that that feels a little like a partial retreat and  “well okay – I’ll accept myself as I am but still there would be….”
 Doesn’t somehow touch the core of you –
 It seems it’s pretty clear to you that – these different formulations which certainly feel increasingly – accurate – yet they don’t – quite speak to your emotions –
 “And maybe there are other alternative – but if there are my gosh – I don’t see them” –
 …might be that even emotions could take some slight loosening of your standards – and then getting the other side is that perhaps more of your sexual fantasies and so on might be channeled toward your wife.
 As though when spontaneously you really feel more positively and more loving to her – then it’s surprising how that affects the whole –
 You think these are perhaps gimmicks in the sense that they are only temporary but recognized as such they do have some –
 It strikes me that you’re using almost the same terms that you described as a sort of level relationship with your wife – I mean this is – maybe this isn’t helpful – I don’t know, but ah – you didn’t want to be too close but there is too far too – and, “I want to stay about – about at the same distance from them – geographically and psychologically too” –
 You feel that really it’s a frightening thing to get close to a person, and the feeling is  “I may get the limb chopped off –“
 So that with – I don’t know whether this is just a chance example – but with some of your men friends you feel, I think, - really close to them –
 The real emotional commitment to a woman --- is a frightening thing –
 Developing a danger somehow –
 Uh, hmm – “if not the dream – then sort of like my mother” –
 Keep a distance –
 It seems that – ah – that you get the feeling that – “not all women are like my mother because some of them might be like my sister” –
 More a variety –
 Would it be overstating it too much ah – it strikes me that what you’re saying is “What I fear in women is what my mother represents – what I look for as an ideal in women – is at least represented by my childhood perception of my sister”
 This judgment a little bit –
 “My mother or any woman who is like my mother tries to make me do things – that’s the surest way of my not doing them” –
 I guess only a couple of minutes are left –
 I might say – one or two things … think that – well I guess one thing I would say is that – ah – I would really like very much to hear from you sometime
 Whenever you feel like it – but ah – because I would like to know – how things have gone with you –
 And ah – ah – also I would say this – that my experience is that ah – you’re pretty well aware of your own feelings as well as thoughts – you’ve been working away at yourself – ah – that can well mean for awhile that you have some times when you’ll feel discouraged, and some times when things go pretty well – what I’m trying to say I guess is that if you find that you have ups and downs – perhaps more than you used to have or something – well that’s probably par for the course – ah – then the other thing I would say is that ah – at Michigan State there are three or – three people who have worked with me who are there now in the Counseling field – and I can give you their names – just because ah – if you should want to talk to somebody – any one of those three would be good people –
 I’ll answer that, but I’d be interested in your answer too –
 Feel your way – in terms of how you do feel – well – let’s see – I’m quite willing to answer that question – I feel that you’ve made a good deal of progress inside yourself – and ah – on the other hand I’ve gradually come to feel that this process of growing or becoming better friends with oneself - knowing one’s self better – something like that – that’s a process that will take a lifetime –
 “Now it’s all done – or something” –
 In some real sense it is never done – and yet –
 ???  goal – you had for yourself – can you – you feel the prospect –
 That – ah – I – I hesitate to guess – I would think that you’re close to that or at that point or something – but ah – I’ve learned that – that it is a matter of living with it and – guess one thing I feel perfectly sure of is that you’ve made real progress toward it –
 Well – I guess we’ll sign off – 1-2-2-3-3-3-4-4-4-4-5-5-5-5-5-
  I'm not quite clear… is the um, control and the distancing yourself from people two different issues or are they the same -- the same issues?
  In that then you want to control people and you're afraid they might control you in the relationships… and so you keep a distance…  Is that?…
  OK.  OK.
  You feel as though that's the one way you know to keep them from controlling you is to keep them away from you.
  Mm hmm.  You're really afraid of what might happen in relationships; they might use you, they might control you…
  You feel if you could only get rid of that, then life could open up more for you…
"  It's, uh, yeah, that's a part that I get… uh, if they want to control you or use you, you just feel, ""I don't have any way of stopping that.""?"
  If you give and inch, they might take a mile.
  You're really quite fearful of what other people might do to you.
  But in your relationship with her you know that it is to be used and you know what it is to be controlled and you know what a struggle it was to move away from that.    So you're very sensitive to that kind of thing.
"  Part of the feeling is, ""I don't want to get caught again."""
  It is scary, you find that you went so far in becoming someone not yourself, and weren't even aware of that.  You weren't even aware that you'd been pulled into being someone other than yourself.
  Then you were a sports fan.
  It was almost true that you weren't much of anybody, you were whatever they wanted you to be.
  You were discovering a self of you own… but it sounds as if it's still rather fragile.
  It's delicate; it's just, just emerging.
  This little infant that is you, you want to take real good care of.
  Protect it and nurture it and rock it.
"    It's kind of, ""Wow!  I'm an exciting person when I get in touch with myself!"""
"  It's really just fantastic to realize, ""Hey - one of the most marvelous people in the world is me."""
  Yeah, and now it's very much just becoming more and more, now what do I do, or how well do I do them, but who am I?  Who I am.  And this week I realized -- and it was very kind of scary the realization, certainly it was -- had something to do with the four days I spent in Bosey in a workshop.  And to see that other people liked me, not for what I do, but for what I am.
  It's a real warming thing to discover that they like the person inside you.  Not what you do necessarily, but who you are.
  You don't know quite what to make of it.  It's so different, it's so new, to have them really care about you.
"  ""Why would they want me to visit?"""
"  ""How could they possibly care about me when they haven't seen me do anything?  They haven't, uh, had that much chance.  And yet they seem to care for me."""
"  ""How could they have gotten a glimpse of what I am when I haven't had a chance to show them?"""
  Mm hmm.
  Kind of let down at that moment.  Let yourself go.
  That's the incredible thing.  It doesn't take a lot of effort, you can just be, perhaps.
  So without the least bit of effort, without even knowing what you said, uh, you find that people responded to you - responded in a very caring and liking way.
  That's just incredible that without you knowing it, sort of, they had spotted you, and had felt close to you.
  Maybe when you're not trying, you're not conscious of doing much of anything, they begin to see you.  That seems really incredible.
  You didn't realize that it's…  -- without realizing it you somehow are communicating yourself at times when you're not aware of that at all.
  And I guess that was a real good feeling to have them respond to you in that way, though a surprising…
  The word freedom is in there somewhere… that uh… without even knowing it you've freely communicated yourself.
  Free to be, right now, and with no demand that you be something in the future, no expectations.
  Somehow an effortless quality to it… in that it exists in the presence -- in the present without particular effort.
  No promises, no guarantees, just what it is right now.
  It's hard to find the right word to capture it.
  A feeling of no demands… and… OK as is.
  It's a real freedom to move about, be stupid if you want, be…
 Yeah.
"  ""I can relax my own expectations of myself."""
  Maybe the plant is growing and becoming more sturdy and it won't be buffeted about by the wind so easily.
  Needs a --  - needs a sort of a fence around it to protect it or something.
  Sometimes you have to say not just to exercise that capacity.
  Sounds like a real new freedom within yourself to say yes or no, whichever you really feel like.
  Uh huh.
"  It doesn't spoil the relationship to say ""No""…"
  It's OK.
  You could say yes without being caught and trapped and used and so on.
  You can stop after one step instead of feeling that if you take one step you have to take the three.
  Mm hmm.  You're really becoming, to yourself, quite trustworthy.
  Closeness is something you want, but closeness is dangerous too.  And especially closeness with women.
  And you may have to pull back to kind of preserve yourself, I gather.
  Mm hmm.
  Mm hmm.  Perhaps people who can trust you when you're close and people who can trust you when you feel a need to pull away.
"  With that kind of person you feel:  ""Yeah, I could be intimate, I could be really close."""
  It's uh…  I guess it's scary enough that you feel the need to really have your hand on that valve all the time.
  Maybe the thing could be more mutual…
  Something you could sort of dream of or see how desirable it would be, even if you can't quite…
  But you know that… your whole face lights up with the idea of a close relationship that might open up new and uncharted possibilities, but wow, that's also scary.
  You might lose control again or might be controlled.
  Uh huh.
  That's one picture you have of a relationship… is of an octopus.  Many tentacles that would just hold you tight.
  You're so super-sensitized to that, that one touch of that tentacle -- one of those tentacles -- is more than you can take.
  You're in the grip of an octopus.
  It really does make it hard to see women in any other way than that.
"  Sort of some deep thing in you that feels, ""Look out, this might be another octopus."""
  You wouldn't mind a few but uh, not the whole eight.
  Sounds like you might like to be held, but not gripped.
  Shed the tentacles.
  That's a part of your new learning, that you need to protect you, you need to protect this plant, you need to give it space, and…
  I see we have to stop in a few minutes but…
  Mm hmm.
  Sort of test it out.
  So that's what your life is at the present time sort of:  testing the ice to see how much weight it will bear.
  But you would love to get to the other side.
  Well I guess I wish you lots of luck in getting to the other side.
  Want to call it quits now?
  OK.    [End of Session]
  Is there any chance of shutting off that noise? We're having a little difficulty hearing. But, I do understand it’s, it’s a question of where to go in school, where to go in your career as  a counselor.
 Marriage and what? What kind of counseling did you say?
 Youth and family counseling. Okay.
" So you really feel, ""I've had a lot of experience but still I'm not, not quite sure now where I want to go."" Is that..."
 Am I getting it right that you really feel quite competent in your work but, you don't have the paper credentials, the academic credentials that would stand back of that.
 Mhm, mhm. That sounds like a dilemma.
  So it's frustrating to have so many limitations when you really feel a good deal of personal confidence but you uh... but you find yourself limited in the things you can do.
"  Mhm, mhm. So, intellectually you know the thing to do is to go to school and get the degree. But inwardly you feel, ""The hell with that."""
"  Mhm, mhm. ""Why should they be demanding that of you?"""
 It does make you mad.
" Mhm, hm. Just thinking about it makes you really feel, ""damn it. … it's frustrating, it's unfair or, something like that."
 Mhm, hm. Yeah. It's gonna cost a lot and you feel as though you're really going backwards, like going backwards to elementary school  or something to catch up on paper. Mhm, hm.
 Mhm, hm. Yeah. I see. Mhm, mhm. So the most it could do for you you feel is simply to show that you can do what you already know you can do.
 Mhm, hm. I'm not quite clear on that but partly because of your anger and frustration you do more things out in the world uh...demonstrating your competence. Is that what you're saying?
 So that, that um... I get the feeling that you're saying too that uh... you don't really expect anything out of the academic aspect except just to prove that you are who you are, that you are somebody, that you've held good positions, that you are competent.
 That you don't expect to learn anything new.
 Searching and questioning?
 Mhm, hm. Mhm. So your very name is a learning name.
" Part of what I hear in all that is you're saying you're not a conforming person, ""I do things in my own way. And I can get there in my own way. I don't have to conform to fit in with the academic framework. That really pisses me off."""
" ""I'll learn. I want to learn. But, I want to learn in my own way, not in some conforming way."""
" You’ve gone to school, you're taking classes right now but a little less underneath is the feeling, ""I avoid school when I can."""
" ""I don't like it."""
" ""I'm self-determined and then that doesn't fit in with my kind of person."""
 And yet, you also feel frustrated when your peers have a lot more credentials than you do.
" You haven't made up... there's no real basic choice that, ""I'm going to finish this."" Instead, it's a kind of, kind of I'll take a little of this and a little of that."
 But the determination to finish it, that hasn't been there.
" Yeah. Because if you're getting enough satisfactions outside that you can't help but feel, ""Oh school. The hell with it."""
 Mhm, mhm. There is a real, a real mismatch between the amount of education you've had and what you're doing.  And the education thing is way low and what you're doing is way high.
 I'd appreciate it if you would. If there is a little piece that you haven't brought up.  I guess it's a real puzzle to know whether you dare to bring it up.
 Mhm?
 No. It sounds like you're puzzled as to whether or not to bring it up... this other piece.
 Mhm, hm.
 Mhm, hm. Mhm, hm. Mhm, hm. Part of me... the fact that I'm white or, that I'm well known or, what?
 The fact that I'm white. You don't feel comfortable bringing up something that really has a lot of meaning to you, because I'm a different color.
 I guess I'd appreciate it if you'd try me out.
 So part of the resentment against school is that you're in a white system, they haven't taught you anything about yourself or, about your background or, your race, your history. Then that makes you mad.
 If you can't get it through the white system, you'll get it yourself.
" Mhm, hm, mhm, hm. Yeah that makes it... that helps to clarify it. So, underneath some dislike for school is the fact that you're saying, ""I don't like to take information or education from the white system. I resent that."""
 Mhm, hm, mhm, hm. They were interested just in the whites.  Mhm, mhm.  So that's much deeper than just a dislike of school isn't it? I mean it's a real,  real strong feeling about, strong feeling against a system that doesn't have your interests at heart. 
 More?
 Uh, huh. The higher you go, the more likelihood of being assimilated. You don't want to be assimilated.  You want to be a black person.
 It narrows down a lot of the places where you might get the kind of education you would want.  Very few. But you want to be of service to your people, and help them, heal them and you would like to get the education for that, not a white education.
 Uh, huh. Uh, huh. I think I'm getting that. That you feel now sufficient strength in your own identity  that perhaps you could even take what you want from a system you don't like. Um... and not lose your identity, not be assimilated. Is that...?
" ""Now a white counselor."""
 Uh, huh. Sure. Uh, huh. Uh, huh.
 Are you saying of white people or, by white people?
 By and for. Mhm, hm. Mhm, hm. So understanding between black and white isn't impossible. You've experienced that.
 Mhm, hm. Mhm, hm. So, with white individuals you've been able to understand and be understood but, a racist white system, that's a different matter.
" Mhm, hm. The feeling is that, ""I hate all the whites except for so and so and so and so and so and so."""
 But there are changes in you going on that will make a difference.
 Yeah. So you want to be a therapist. You want to help the in peace making process and for that... maybe you have to have an education, um?
 Mhm, hm. Mhm, hm. I can see our time is nearly up. Is there anything more you you want to say?
" Mhm, hm. So there is... you have faced the possibility of excluding white people, hating white people and so forth. But, you really have come to the conclusion, ""Well, they need healing too and, and it's... you don't want to have a complete exclusion of, of white interests."
" Okay. You realized within yourself, ""I can make a contribution to the white person from myself."" Okay. Shall we call it quits?"
 Okay.
 What I’d like to do is when you feel ready is if you would tell the group how our interview seemed to you. I’ll tell them how it seemed to me. And then we could take questions to you or to me. Does that seem okay?  When you’ve thought about it a little, then how did this, how did this half hour seem to you?
  Took a lot of courage. Mhm. Can we?  I think to me it seemed, uh, one thing I felt keenly, I felt with you and for you, more than you might even know because I’m a rebel too.  I’m not black but I’m a rebel. And, uh, so I could very well understand you, your resentment about having to catch up on the paper credentials when you feel you already have the competence. Um, then I was very much interested in your silences because, uh, after each silence you went into something more significant and after the longest silence was when you were debating and debating whether to really talk about the issue of color. And, uh, I, I, I felt they were real working silences. I knew things were going on in you all the time that weren’t being said and I didn’t need to know them. Um, uh, I appreciated the, uh, fact that you didn’t try to come to any false conclusions. You were still uncertain as to just where you’ll go but you were thinking it through more clearly. I liked that, uh… And I was, I, I, I appreciated the fact that you were willing to talk with me even though I was white. Um, I really appreciated that. And, uh, I don’t know whether you felt understood. I felt that I understood you pretty well, um, but anyway, I felt, I felt in half an hour we did a half an hour’s worth. I felt good about that. Shall we let them ask us questions?
 Well, if you want to come in whenever it's ...
 It sort of knocks the bottom out...
 You've always gone forward, and now suddenly there's no ...
 ... forward hmmm?
 That is you feel that this other business has affected your relationship with your friends and with other people.
 Probably that relationship has  ...
 From having so few things to do you've gone too far in some directions.
 You think that in many situations this might be physical but not in yours it isn't.
 I wonder if maybe we should find out if this point ... it's not the thing you want to do.
 You feel as though you ... some people might say that that's just the inevitable thing but ...
 Well I think that it's more important than what anyone thinks is the fact that you're trying to find something for yourself ...
 That's what you believed in and now suddenly you come to a stop in your own capacity to carry forward.
 Is that it?
 You really have thought of that kind of possibility.   It isn't the kind of thing that you're happy about.  Do you want to tell me some other things that you've thought about in regard to the whole business.
 Your interest is there and your strength is there, but where to use it, that's what has you stumped.
 You feel as though there's not much purpose to that ...
 It just doesn't seem worthwhile, is that ... uh...
 You feel that certainly you're not ready to say that you're old and ready to quit ...
 What to do with the coming years …
 That's an area of real interest for you.  Yet you feel ...
 The way in which you try to utilize it has made you seem opinionated.
 You feel the whole world is out of step but you and that even to you pooh-pooh at that ...
 Intellectually you know it's a bit ridiculous and yet you actually feel that way.
 You'd like to find some outlet for your interests in younger people.  But so far can't ...
" You don't like the ""pat"" ways that anyone has been able to point out to you so far "
 Mhm.  You thought at that time you might pull out and start somewhere else.
 At times it has a good deal of appeal and other times it seems like a silly notion.
 You think there might be plenty of difficulties in getting established…
  but you do feel sure ...
 You feel that after all plenty of individuals have wondered what to do when their families have grown up.
 In other words it isn't just a question of filling in your time...
 ... It's deeper than that.  You're just wondering where to pick up.
  but as I gather, you don't feel very happy about it ...
 Dissatisfied with yourself.
 The trouble is in you but how to get at it, hmmm.
 Well I think that's where, uh, talking it through may help both of us to see where the ...
 That is you really want your life to be useful.
 You want to do most anything if you thought it was...
 That feeling that-uh-really it doesn't make any difference whether you exist or not.
 That sense uselessness that really bothers you.
 I'm not quite clear about that.  You feel there's nothing to do ...
 It's within you that there's nothing there...
 Yet you know that you have capacities and you have done things...
 You just feel pretty close to desperate as you look toward the long future, is that right...
 You feel it's getting worse rather than better.
 You fluctuate quite a bit.  But it seems there's plenty on the down side.  Is that it.
 It really meant something looking forward to the fact that you'd be coming in.
 You can't fill in the whole future with an old patchwork...
 That is- your memories now are not of the positive things but the unpleasant angles, is that it?
 The unpleasant aspects magnify...
 Your present situation is not all bad but your feeling about the future is really the issue ...
 Probably he's no worse right now and why this should be a crisis right now--that troubles you ...
 You feel that when your daughter leaves he'll probably ...
 ... leave you.
 You feel there's something pent up in you that...
 ... can't find any other outlet and so it insists on holding him...
 As you look at it why, uh, it looks differently, but actually you feel a drive to make them over. 
 So that even though you realize you're foolish, still you feel a drive to make her do the things she ought to be doing ...
 You feel you are really doing the things which cut off your friendship.
 One example of your doing things that actually hurt your relationships.
 You feel that a lot of these things are perplexing to others who see you do them ...
 In being yourself you feel I've got to do this, this is right.
 But there's been some of that, some sort of thing, earlier but not to the point where it did all the damage it's doing.
 You've been a real problem to yourself.
 You seem to think it would be nice to know whether others face the same thing or whether you're different.   Would you say what your own thinking is on that?
 You feel that perhaps you really have more drive than a number of other people.
 You've explored and thought about different things you might try but none of them satisfied. 
 You think that you're looking at it wrong; that really perplexes you, somebody ought to straighten you out.
 Surely there ought to be outlets for the kind of abilities you have, but you feel rather hopeless about finding these outlets.
 You've done about all you can as far as you're concerned in trying to find such outlets. 
 You hoped you'd fine the answer from him even if it was an answer ...
 You really would have welcomed it if he had said well now ...
 ... you can't do much more.
 You were a bit disappointed that he gave you...
 You felt that he just confirmed that you had abilities and so on to use.
 When you are blue you feel you really are ill.
 You really are fearful of having anything to do with people.
 You are afraid of the way you could react.
 You wish you had the satisfaction they have.
 You felt that these attitudes are real changes in your own way of looking at things.
 That is, you doubt that it has anything to do with age at this particular time ...
 If you had been cut off from satisfying action at any age you probably would have felt much the same.
 Always before you found a channel in which you could put your energies.
 That was a real blow but you did find a way out.
 You felt at the time that it had knocked all the props out but ...
 ... then you were able to go forward.
 In other words you have experienced before this feeling of being shut off from satisfactions but each time before you've been able to find a way out.
 You've really planfully directed yourself, to get what you want .
 What you'd really like is for me or someone to point the way out.
 You feel you'd accept bad news or good news ...
 Well I think that my feeling would be that uh I wouldn't know the way out for you, but I think that if we can explore this situation, there is a chance of your finding the kind of answer that you're looking for.  It probably will be within yourself.
 Our time is up for this morning uh, would you like to come back next Monday, or was that the next time I suggested?  I don't know whether that's feasible or not or whether you want to come back.
 Next Friday wouldn't be possible.
 You could come in Monday.  Do you want to do that?
 Well, where do you want to start in this morning?
 Uh, going into it really uh, gets you a bit upset, is that it?
 You'd be glad for me to take the lead.  You feel as though you're sort of played out.
 Well, I think the thing that we've found is that a person really gets the furthest if they explore their own situations, and I don't know but ... I don't know if you wish to do that but if you do why you could talk about any angle of it that ... that you'd been thinking about or...
 Up against a stone wall kind of a sensation.
 Did you wonder if you're avoiding reality by ... I'm not quite clear...
 Maybe some of the more specific aspects might uh have more to do with the case, is that it?
 You've wondered about a job, but the things you think you can earn at, you can't do.  You've considered being a foster parent, and you're not quite sure how that would work out in regard to your husband.
 You're also wondering about the training but you're not sure there what direction that would take ...
 You really have been trying to work out what the possibilities are ...
 You feel time might handle it, but you're doubtful.
 I know that does to a person ... just waiting and hoping that it will clear up, makes things if anything worse.
 That's what you'd like awfully well ... for someone to come out and say now here's the recipe and the ingredients ... and come out with a nice cake.
 You feel that really is childish and yet you can't help but feel that way.
 It's been pretty hard to get advice from those you respect.
 So that you've been able to get some advice is that it ...
 ... but actually that hasn't …
 Been too ...
 And that's where your own thinking really ...
 Mhm.  Feeling that somehow you've got an important part in what has happened, and yet feeling that that isn't so.
 You're a little bit fearful that if you did give yourself somewhat more to religion you might go too far ...
 Everything that you take in, just seems to, uh, prove more and more strongly that, uh, the whole world is out of step.
 You feel at real odds somehow with the world in general.
 You sort of hesitate to put it that way when it just comes down to it----
 It hasn't been bad to you, but it's wrong in its direction, is that it, and you're right.  Even though you hesitate to say it a little bit to put it that way.
 As long as there are two of you that are right that gives you assurance.
 It bothers you.
 You don't like that feeling that the whole world's wrong and you're right.  But still there it is.
 There's another whole area in which ... you feel out of step with what is going on?
 The freedom that you used to look forward to so much you have now and it has turned sour sort of ...
 You had goals along that line and now ...
 In other words, you could accept this sort of difficulty when the public office involved him but uh ...
 Your situation might really be the same now, but that isn't the way it looks to you ...
 You feel it really is rottener than uh, it was ...
 You don't feel there is a place for the honest person.
 It isn't as if that was any chief goal or single aim, but the same thing I take is happening there in your feelings that is happening in other areas.
 There isn't.  There might be an outlet or a channel.
 You feel that that is cut off too.
 Something now that you choose not to go into.
 The alternative from these other activities has been making over your friends, and uh that produces trouble for you too.
 Mhm ... it's just possible that in trying to remould your friends you're also in some deeper way very critical of yourself.
 You really feel that somehow you've got to get at yourself.
 In other words, how to go about that remodelling job is something uh you just don't feel sure of,  you're sure of the goal but the method ...
 Only sure that it should be done perhaps ...
 A minor instance but you feel it's symbolic of the fact that other people are wrong in your judgment.
 Uh huh.
 There too.  Intellectually you feel perhaps he was right, but emotionally you're pretty darn sure he was wrong.
 You're wondering whether I'm convinced that you're really trying ...
 You're really wondering as to how it impresses me as to whether you're working on your problem or whether you're saying ... I'm helpless you take over.
 Would it be true that there's some of both involved?
 It might be that there's some ...
 You're really quite convinced that there isn't within you the capacity to work it out.
 You feel that's really back of the coming in is the fact that you feel helpless to do anything about it.
 You're pretty hopeless in regard to yourself and you feel that there might be something that would help.
 It's made you question a little bit the fact that you might feel too good  too superior to fit in where you actually could get a job.
 As you look at it you just can't see yourself going into a... at a fairly modest level, in surroundings you wouldn't like just to bring in a little more cash ...
 You just wouldn't want to do that.
 If someone were to tell you to do it, as a step to something else, that might uh ...
 You could accept it, but to take the responsibility yourself, no go.
 You're raising the question with yourself again that some of these things look silly and uh useless.  Is it because you feel yourself a little superior.
 It's possible you might be rating yourself too high ...
 You always have been able to find an answer, haven't gotten into a jam like this.  You just have a sneaking occasional faith that maybe you can find out in this too.
 You think the situation as you have realized or seen it up to this point ... you're stuck, you need something new that you see or knew must enter in to make it possible ...
 In other words, it's pretty darned important that you do something about it fairly soon.
 There again there's just a question ...  Maybe you should try to find other people with similar views and ...
 People with whom you would be congenial.
 Possibly, you ought perhaps to develop that kind ...
 But there again you don't feel sure quite how.
 You're both liberal and right.
 But you're much more sure of what you believe and feel is right than you are of how to devel…  implement these beliefs.
 You find yourself saying things even though they create a storm.
 One of the real puzzles is how ... you've come to feel differently.
 In other words, not all of them agree, and some of them agree with you on different specific aspects.
 But there doesn't seem to be quite as much conflict about their being different about their viewpoint.
 Even though some of them agree with you on one specific angle, still you're the one that has the feeling that it's always you against a great many others.
 You have the feeling that perhaps if you had the courage of your convictions you'd uh, go ahead and take the consequences.
 But that doesn't appeal to you as a way of ...
 In other words you in a sense you've tried to act that way, but you don't like the way it's coming out.
 You know people of those ages whom you don't like the answer they've found and you see yourself going the same direction, and you don't see how you can get off that track.
 You really feel two ways about her.
 On the one hand you'd hate to become as estranged from other people as she was and yet again you admire her guts because ...
 You have a pretty deep respect for her stand and still it disturbs you that she was so unhappy.
 You feel that she really took it on the chin, but she took it with head high.
 She was a fighter for what she stood for.
 You feel that although she must have had a good deal of inner satisfaction along that line, still it isn't what you call happiness.
 You feel that she really cut herself off from her husband ... and even in the association with you it wasn't too happy for you.
 You admire her and you have a question mark about her.
 She really led a pretty unhappy life.
 Not just the sentimental unhappiness but ...
 ... the kind that cuts pretty deep.
 The kind that really feels no joy.
 That same sense of a deep unhappiness that troubles you ...
 It's a possibility that you're just on a groove and you can't possibly get off.
 You feel pretty sure others can ... change their direction.
 It isn't logical but there again it is the way you feel.
 I'm not sure I'm clear about that last, but at least you feel somewhere in a book or somewhere there is ...
 There are answers to some of this.
 In other words it really frightens you a little bit - the extent that you are in that groove.
 So that you are really kept from enjoying the funny aspects of the play because ...
 There again you felt out of step with what others saw and felt.
 You'd like very much to know how you compare with others.
 You feel that there you might get the evidence ...
 ... to tell you ...
 Whether you're really out of line or not.  Well, I see our time is up. I did make a note of the time I have free.  Uh, would you want to come back again in about a week. Would that ...
 Well, uh, I could see you a week from tomorrow at 1 o'clock.  That would be Tuesday.  If you'd like we can leave it that way and if your hay fever is worse you could drop me a note or phone in ...
 Yes.
 Yes - because I know how that is; ... Then next Tuesday, a week from tomorrow at one o'clock.
 Come in.  Been on quite a trip have you?
 Mhm.  Quite a change.
 Mhm.  Just felt as though you must have that desire and want to ...
 Rip into people.  And this time into me you mean.
 It really bothers you to have that--
 Sort of almost more than you could control.
 Felt that you didn't want to let yourself go: then that--
 You're sure that it isn't a profitable thing to do, but still you--
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Mhm; mhm.
" Yeah, mhm.  But at the time it just comes over you that ""You're absolutely wrong and I'm right""."
 You feel that it's got to be something inside and that nobody can help you on that. Is that...
 ... Well, I think--I think I could say two things on that.  I don't know whether they will help or not.  But--one is that thinking it through with someone else is--even though you find the answer within yourself--is sometimes different than mulling it over by yourself.
 And the second thing I was going to say is that certainly you're free to say whatever you think, whether it's toward me or toward someone else.
 You mean it would really feel good if somebody would tear into you.
 You feel sure there is something wrong within you that--
 Mhm.
 Feel that working for someone that--
 Mhm.  That is you feel sure that in that situation too that this--it would just work into something which would ...
 ... work out badly for you and for other people.
 You feel that would be inevitable.
 Mhm; mhm.
 Well, I can show you the results of the tests.  You're wondering whether they might turn up some special ability ...
 ... or something.  You feel that just--just filling up your time isn't what you want.
 If you had some inkling where your abilities could be used that would be the--
 In other words you feel you could accept the judgment from someone else.
 But it's your own conviction about your ability one way or the other that you can't make up your mind in regard to ...
 Just a useless energy and ability--not accomplishing--
 Mhm.
 You mean you feel that the fear of doing that sort of thing is just preventing you--
 That--that isn't a fear of the activity so much but that it's just ...
 The feeling 
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 But you know within yourself that it isn't that you would be fearful of any amount of work, or ...
 You really feel that somehow I'm sort of holding out onto a judgement that I must have ...
 In regards to you.
 Well, I can--I can really understand how you might feel that.  Actually I've learned that it's very genuinely presumptuous of me to suppose that I can know more about the other person than he knows about himself.  I can help him discover some of these things about himself; but I can't judge him: I-I don't know.
 Mhm.  You feel that actually I am judging, no matter what I think.
 Mhm. You feel that if you were me you would be making judgments. Is that it?
 You feel I have more of a basis for making judgments.
 And when one finds out how completely individual people are, the effect it has on me is to make me far less willing to make judgments.
 Then it seems to you that unless we were able to make judgments about people, then ...
 “Opinions,” mhm, but unless that were a part of it then talking things over would be entirely futile.
 I'm not sure that I understand that--but you feel that for some people who don't face things squarely, then opinions on the part of some one else might not be helpful?  Is that it; --might not be necessary.
 Mhm.
 I see.  That is if the person is not down to the truth by themselves then counseling might help them get there.
 But in your case you felt you are down to the truth about yourself.
 And that--that sort of a system isn't necessary.
 Mhm ...
 Mhm.
 You feel that as far as you're concerned this has merely been a reviewing of things you've already known and already ...
 ... talked over.
 You feel you just find it within your self.
 Feel you've really said all there is to say.  Now would you want to see the results of the tests?  I have the information here.
 Mrs. ---------------, she's no longer on the staff: otherwise I might have arranged for her to talk with you; but she's having a baby and has left the staff.
 No, not yet--and here are the results on the three tests?   I think you can--that's-this is from low to high and the quality or trait is listed here.  This first quality is mentioned, and you're in the seventh decile.  You're familiar with that term, decile?  And then on this sheet I have the results on the two other tests.
 I might say--you might not remember the tests.  I can show you which was which; that might--that is based on these three questionnaires that you took.
 And the Rorschach test you probably know--that's the one with the ink blots.
 You feel that one clicks somehow.
 
 
 Capable of more than you actually achieve.  Is that what you feel?
 Mhm.
 Mhm.  Well I am sure Mrs.--------would say if she were giving you that, that all those descriptions are very tentative.  That is, we don't feel that tests of that sort ...
 You kind of question that, you mean.
 You doubt that---
 You'd be more willing to take the judgment of a test or a tester than your own judgment.
 You feel that they are lined up pretty much in the middle.
 You just feel sure that I have some opinion about ...
 ... About what you should do.
 I suspect you would find it hard to believe that I have really--have learned to follow people's thinking and help them in making their own judgments,--and have found that--found them so far superior to my own opinions that I--I do not--I don't have an opinion about what you should do.  I feel sure on this.
 You just wish someone would give you an opinion of some kind.
 You feel that you wouldn't follow the opinion but somehow just the fact of an opinion seems to have--
 A great deal of weight with you.
 That might be somewhat similar.
 Just whether you feel a lack of physical activity, or lack of the mental activity.
 That is, the question as to whether there has been some element of laziness there.
 You feel that possibly you might be in some way mentally lazy.
 You felt that you leaned---
 More toward self-confidence.
 In your own judgment you felt you were rather--
 High on that.
 Mhm.
 You just feel as if--a complete confidence on some of those points.
 The picture test we have done nothing with.  I'm sorry we haven't had time.  That one isn't really a scorable test.  That's more of a tentative thing.  I've just done nothing with that.  That's where you told the whole story about each picture.  You know that one.
 You don't know whether that's a good way of handling them or a poor ...
 Sometimes your frustrations you do meet--plan for rather carefully and wait--
 And others you just can't wait to--
 You feel--if I get this--you feel that when you're out on one of those making-over sprees that really you should be quite unbearable.
 You feel that after one of those one reason they do not come back at you is that they tend to agree that you're right.  Is that what you feel?
 You feel it causes pain on both sides.
 In other words, how could you get your mind to function more effectively.
 As I--as far as I know, I expect that it means the--well just as we speak of a--an  engine might run, but one wants it to run efficiently-does it do its job?--does it function up to its full-horsepower.  I guess that's the term.
 You feel that might be the thing that's getting in your way.
 Mhm.
 Considering all the feelings you have inside--
 It really surprises you how smoothly you can get along with others.
 You're satisfied then that there seems to be one--
 You wonder if that could account for--
 ... the draining off of energy.
 You realize there is some truth in that angle of it.  Is that it?
 The thought that you have the push and still not finding the satisfaction--
 Is that it?
 So that really is the question you're struggling with too.
 Mhm.  The only basic difference is that some how they've accepted not getting very far and--
 Consequently find some happiness.
 You felt that was an asset and was constructive at one time.
 But you don't feel that it is at the present time.
 You feel that's one place where it's all wet.
 You feel that is a pretty basically wrong evaluation because you feel you don't have difficulties from outside.
 That really that would be a simpler way--
 Of looking at it.
 But actually that isn't the way you see it.
 It really doesn't seem to you to click; and yet you can realize that that would be ...
 ... true of--in some other case.
 You still feel that some opinion would somehow help.
  Because, you know, some of these other things that you don't feel sure about yourself.
 One way or the other.
 To some extent even relations with others would be a struggle for everybody, and-
 And the fact that you don't feel they're too much of a struggle is shown by the fact that you don't try to get away from them.
 Part of your really deep goal is to keep human relationships—
 Rather than--
 Chop them off one at a time.
 You're not asking that they should all be smooth and rosy.
 You feel that's all ...
 Yes, I think that’ll be all right.  Would you like to come back and talk over things more or not?
 If at any time you'd like to come in and discuss anything I want you to feel free to do so.
 At this point you don't feel that we've done very much.
    I'll bet. And you're going through a stage if I understand is a little bit like what it was at seven, sort of shutting out the world or shutting yourself into a space where you're trying to figure out what it is that you want or who you are?
   A trip into a fairly dark place, I suppose.
 You've been meeting other people's expectations of you and it seems that that's what you should do now. I guess you're really questioning that very much.
  You carried that within you.
   If it's going to be death, okay, you'll take it. But you're not going to take it unnecessarily.
  To really crucify yourself, is that what you're saying? Or to be a martyr? I'm not really sure . . .
 Putting the other person first.
 Mhm, hmm. Is that part of the hurt? You referred earlier to hurt and I didn't quite understand that.  I can understand the feeling of desperateness and also I can understand how hard it would be to have no one really understand that feeling in you.
 And I, I imagine . . . or perhaps I catch a little bit of resentment, that you really poured a lot of love and caring into that family and had gotten some back from him, but after his death, none of it paid off for you in any way.
 So it hurt not to get that love back. It wasn't mutual.
 You never were heard.
 Mhm, hmm. And in striving for that, one reason you really weren't heard was that you didn't dare express the person you were, the sick person you were at that time.
 Yeah. Yeah. So, it's not acceptable even to you to do some of the things you did, and also I gather to live behind that facade of falsehood for quite awhile . . . not telling anybody what the score was.
 Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. How could you possibly let anybody know where you were physically?
 You've just had no experience in being the needy person that needed help and needed . . .
" But it sounds as though the leukemia helped you to really destroy the notion of you as the ""image."""
 Play it safe.
 Yeah. It does.
 Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Somehow, what I get out of it is that being kind of false to yourself really was more of a burden to you, causes you more concern, than the fact that you had leukemia.
 Mhm, hmm. You don't want them to carry the kind of burden and image that you carried.
 And I catch a note of bitterness there. A feeling that they really make judgments without, without knowing the picture.
 And then you were reminded all over again.
 Yeah.
 That wouldn't be living up to the standards you've set for yourself and other people have set for you.
 Mhm, hmm. Perhaps, sounds as though you're saying several things here, that perhaps deciding you wanted to live made a real difference. And also deciding that what you were experiencing as your needs and your wants and so on, really had some validity.
 Mhm, hmm. So that was a big, heavy burden too, then huh?
 Life has been a very fluctuating up and down, kind of
 But that's one good thing that the leukemia did for you.
 So you feel as though in some sense you prepare the readiness for the illness, or you, are taking in something from outside; it makes you ready to have it.
 I gather you feel that where before these things happened to you because of what happened to you from the outside, now you are beginning to feel control over it yourself . . . from the inside. Is that, is that part of what you're saying?
" That has a lot of meaning to me, and I want to make sure I'm getting it straight. Down in that basement as a 7-year old with the lights out . . . you were really finding yourself and, I gather, trusting yourself.  And then life was, said to you, ""No, no, don't do that. We have the standards for you. Live up to our expectations. You've got to be the image. You've got to be just right. And everything."" And now you are gradually recapturing what you felt as a 7-year old."
 It was well buried?
" ""You're a credit to your race."""
 And that something, as I get it, is you were giving up something of yourself.
 Sounds like you wanted so much to help people, that ah helping yourself didn't fit into that picture at all.
 At seven, you were really a part of the universe and you knew it.
" It was something that you wanted to do. It was something you had a view. Not because somebody else said, ""Hey you should be interested in the stars or something like that."""
" ""But then, that's just childish. That's just . . . """
" ""Don't trust that stuff.""  ""They're telling you what's right."" "
 So those standards and what they did to you really, really dominated your life, if I get it right.
" Yeah. One way of putting it is I feel you are saying, ""Damn it, that seven year old was more right than all that's gone on in between."""
" And so you're wondering, ""Yeah, but can I trust him?"""
" Maybe part of that reason is you feel, ""My God, I've told him a lot. I've trusted him. Have I trusted him too much?"""
 Or Joe Doakes.
 Yeah. Yeah.
" So as you get deeper into that feeling it isn't just that you, earlier, you said you wondered if it was wise of her to do that. Now you know, ""Damn it, I'm really angry at her for doing that to me."""
 Our time's about up and I don't know if there’s more you want to say now for today, okay. Or if not, we can call it quits for today.
 All right.
" ""Okay. I was really screwed by a lot of people, and I have reason to be angry, and I am angry, and I need to say that."" I can hear the anger in there."
 Mhm, hmm. You're talking about it in a very civilized fashion.  Living up to those standards.
 Okay? Shall we call it quits for today?
 Alright good. See you tomorrow.
 I've thought a lot about what you had to say about that.
" Your mind says sort of, ""Oh, cool it.  Don't ... don't get into uh, such strong emotion""."
" Mmm. I think I get that:  that your ... your mind is taking the place of the system in saying now, uh, ""Play it right.  Do the right ... do the proper thing""."
" But some other part of you is saying, ""Yeah, but there's some anger there""."
 There's some real anger there.
 You'd like to get in touch with what's going on in you.
 Not ... not some label or other.
      Uh, uh-huh.
 Mmm. Mmm.
 Let me see if I understand that.  That you feel as though, um, what the culture and people and so on have ... have done to you ... that's really caused you more suffering than the leukemia.   Is that what you're saying?
 Mmm.
 Mmm.
 So really, what the culture did to you was give you a cancer of the mind.
 I know.  Another label.
 Yeah ... If you could ...  If you could pin it on one person, then your rage would be justified and you could really get after that person.
 Mmm.
 Mmm.
 Yeah, maybe you haven't given it to them.
" That's what I sense is going on now ...  that you feel ""there's so many reasons why I really shouldn't express my anger.  I'll, I'll talk about all those reasons""."
" Yeah. Um, and uh so I hear you explaining and explaining that uh, uh,  ""that's not my nature to be angry.  It's just that I am angry right now""."
" I get what you're saying and I also feel quite strongly that I want to say, ""it's OK with me if you're angry here""..."
 Sure, sure, I'm not saying you have to be.  .  I'm just saying it's OK with me.
   Damn right.
 Mmm, mmm.
 Mmm, mmm.
 Perhaps at a deeper level you're afraid of the hurt that you may experience if you let yourself experience the anger.
 Mmm.
 Mmm.
 Mmm.
 Yeah, mmm.
" I really do get that ...  that this ... this realization that, ""Maybe what I'm most afraid of is the hurt that I might experience"", um, makes you more cautious about whether you should, whether you should or could really let go of the ... of the anger."
 It's a risk.
 Mmm.  It's new.
 Mmm.
 To show it and ... I guess to let yourself sort of ... experience it, that ... that, I guess would be difficult.
 Mmm. Mmm.
 Seems like a horribly big risk.
" Mmm, mmm, mmm. ""Suppose I really expose to somebody the fact that I'm deeply, deeply hurt"".  That in a sense would be comparable to having to be dependent on someone when you can't walk or something like that."
 Mmm.  You're saying it from here up.  .
 Mmm, mmm, mmm.
 Mmm.
" You don't want to say, ""I really was defeated at times"", and yet that's the truth."
 Mmm.
 Mmm, mmm.
 You want love to be mutual.
" Something really awful about showing ... letting anyone know that ""I'm hurt"".   ""I'm hurting""."
 Mmm.
 Mmm.
 Mmm.
 Mmm.
 Maybe ... maybe, maybe that'll keep it from coming up above this level .
" ""I would like to let it out""."
 A big lump of hurt, though.   And how to let that hurt come out in the open ... how to let it ... emerge and be out here instead of way down locked in here.
"   Sure.  It'd be awfully nice if somebody could say, ""Now, if you do this and this, all your hurt will come out and it will be gone forever""."
 Be great, wouldn't it?
  No.
 No, I'm not holding out on you.
 I think it goes back to some of the things you mentioned.  A man doesn't admit he's hurt ... a black man especially doesn't admit that he's been hurt by anything.  Uh, a father doesn't admit he's been hurt by being away from his children.  Just too many things that say: no, no, no ... don't let it out.    But inside there's the hurt.
 A phrase came to me a minute ago that, “If you could let that out, ...” I don't know whether this will ring true to you or not ...   “If you could let that out, it would be the Voice of a Victim.”  I don't know if that makes any sense or not.
 Mmm, just like to have socked him.
 That's what I was thinking.    I was just thinking, if you could only cry.
 First place, a man doesn't cry.
 But I guess you're saying that times you have that lump in your throat and you sure as hell feel like crying.
 Tear jerkers?
 Mmm, you say you're not sure whether crying for yourself is constructive.  I feel also you're afraid of crying for yourself.
 Probably your seven-year-old could cry.
 Mmm.  It probably is better than never letting anyone see you cry.
" Just seeing that all the sorrow that you feel for yourself and for what's happened to you and all that, uh, ""that doesn't really exist"".  It's just uh, you're too busy to have any thoughts of that."
  But the sorrow is still there.
 If you did cry, what would some of the themes of that crying be?
" You feel really sad that you never gave him a straight message on that, that ""I love you""."
 Mmm.
 Things began to fall apart for you there, mmm, mmm.
" Mmm, mmm, mmm.  When the real message perhaps is, ""I think you're a lousy S.O.B.""."
 Mmm.
 Part of the sorrow would be for your father-in-law.  You'd really weep for him.
" But you get some satisfaction out of saying, ""You people don't realize how much you hurt me"". They might not be able to hear that message, but you'd get some satisfaction out of ... out of expressing that, out of ... out of letting, letting yourself know, letting others know that, ""God, I've been hurt!"""
" ""I've been wounded""."
" So there are probably loads of people you wouldn't dare open up to on that,  but I guess you're opening up to me to say, ""Yes, but I have been really wounded, badly, by a lot of people""."
 Mmm, mmm.
 Mmm. mmm.
 Just like that.
" So that, that's been a ... a hurt and a shock and makes you feel, ""I can't risk myself loving somebody else like that because that might disappear some way or other""."
 It's what?
" Mmm. mmm.  ""Love goes out from me but nothing comes back""."
 You feel there's so little chance of anyone else really understanding you.
 You feel...?
 I see, mmm, mmm.
 It's still too much locked in.
 Mmm, mmm, sort of letting things loose rather than ...  ... keeping them under your control.
 And that's a new experience.
 Sounds as though you're more accepting of yourself as a person who is vulnerable, who has been hurt, who is hurting, and who wants love ... who doesn't want it all to be a one-way street of giving love.  You want love back in return.
  Mmm.  Probably'd be simpler to have an operation.
 I understand that. I ... you're, you're uh, it visualizes in my mind you're walking all around the edge of that pit, but you're not really letting yourself down into it; so you're letting me know all about it , but, but not it.
" Yeah.  I, I hear you saying, ""I really want to get to that, but it will have to be at my pace.  I can't ... I can't force it. I can't... but I do want to get to it""."
 You mean, you blame the disease on all that stress, is what you mean?
 You could try it.
  Standards, standards, standards.
 You were brought up right ... weren't you?
 And still in spite of yourself, buy a good deal of it.
 You really don't want to, but still you find ...  ... you can't do the uncultured thing.
 That helps to explain why I feel you've kept your language more, quite guarded here.  I, I, I realize I've used more profanity than you have. 
 You'd like to just tell off the bastard!
 You can't even do that.  
  Both inside and outside
 It wouldn't come out in nice, polite language.
 Yeah.  You may not tell it to them face to face, but you need to get it out of yourself somehow.
" ""The bastards really screwed me""."
 Mmm, mmm.
 But there were a lot of people who, though they may or may not have beaten you physically, treated you in a way that just trampled on you and beat you up and spit on you and made you a nobody, a piece of garbage.
 Mmm.
 Yeah.  To say a word like that or several of the words you've used just isn't at all the same as feeling those feelings inside and really feeling them fully.
 Yeah, how to ... how to vomit up that green slime that's been a part of your experience.
 You wouldn't look civilized; you wouldn't look cultured.
 You wonder about that ... whether if you, if you let out all the ... all the hell that you've experienced inside, it might uh, it might bring back your illness.
 O.K. 
 No, not quite.  It's more spirals, I think.   Getting, as you say, getting very close, you feel, you feel beaten right now as though, if only something could come out, you wouldn't feel beaten.
 Mmm.
 It damn near made an animal out of you.
 No. That's very clear.
 Took a great big stick and rammed it up your ass ...  Is that what you're saying?
 OK.  That's what I want to know, whether I was catching your meaning correctly.
 And it's that kind of pain that you've suffered.
 Goes beyond words.
 You're feeling some of that hurt now.
 Mmm, mmm.  It seems, it seems to me that you're uh feeling it ... you know what it's like to be in desperation and you know what it could drag you to, and so maybe that’s what’s happened to some of them.  Something like that.
" ""I don't, I don't feel it ...  I don't hurt, I'm, I'm fine""... That’s a lot of bullshit."
 Yeah, that's right, mmm.  And just for a moment there, I felt you really were experiencing that too, really feeling that stick shoved up your ass.
 Yeah.  That's right.  You get that close, you get that close to the pit and then pull away a little.
" I think ... I think what you're saying is, ""I feel as though, dammit, everybody else is to blame.  My mind says, Oh, no, you have, you probably have a part in it too, but...""   ...your feelings are ..."
 Mmm.  Made yourself vulnerable sometimes.
 Most of the times.
 Mmm, mmm.
 I want to be clear about your meaning.  You've never felt so much of being beaten as you do right now?  Is that what you're saying?
 Yeah.
 You might practically disappear if you really let me know how hurt and beaten and awful you feel.
 Hmm?
 Too much.  Mmm.
" I, I think you feel as though, ""I've gone about as far as I can go at this point""."
 Mmm.  Taking a drink of water.
 Even though you know there's more there, you know that you're keeping some of it down.  Um and to know those things may be helpful too.
 Fascinating.  And it's easier to talk about leukemia and the possibility of death and all that, than it is to talk about all the hurt and awfulness that you've suffered.
 OK.  All right, mmm.  Gone about as far as you can go.
 Mmm.  OK, we'll call it quits.
 Your situation is tough.
 Do you want to tell me a little bit about it?
 It is.  It is that it's all disruptive at home.
 But it's hard to tell about.
 Uhm, hmm.
 Just what?
 That's one possibility is to just drop it, hhm?  Uhm, hmm.
 Ah . . . if you could just kind of put it out of mind.
 Uhm, hmm.  And maybe sometimes that seems like a . . .
 Uhm, hmm.  An impossible thing to do.  You might like to  forget it and drop it.  But . . .
 I see.  Uh, that . . . and this is your parents you're speaking of?
 That when they get away with . . .
 Or anyone.
 That, “When they get away with murder once, why, boy, then they try it again.”
 Uhm, hmm.
 Uhm, hmm.  And I guess you don't like her when . . .
 …she meddles in other people's affairs.  That makes you pretty . . .
 Disgusted.  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.   Could you tell me anymore about that?
 I'm sorry, I didn't quite…
 I see.  If you, if you, you really… told, that would . . .
 It would kind of incriminate you.
 And kind of put you in a bad light if you really . . .
 …told about it.
 I see.  So you feel you would hardly, um, dare to tell your side of it because it might incriminate you.  You’d rather leave it up to your folks.
 Uhm,hmm.  Uhm,hmm.
 Well, there might be . . . the thing is that, uh, I guess it settles that part of it.  But I was thinking that if  there was anything that you were willing to tell me that would help me to know you  better, that would  be . . .
 What about her?
 She incriminated herself?
 Her son was in it?
 Uhm,hmm.
 Uhm, hmm.  If she brings in her son's history and your parents bring in your history?   Then that's going to be pretty rough.
 I'm not sure that I quite understand that.
 Yours isn't any better than his.
 So that, in a sense, both histories would sort of incriminate each of you.
 Uhm, hum.  Hmm. I guess what you're saying in this, is that if the truth came out sort of, or if your parents told the whole story, gee, it would make it look pretty bad for you.  Is that . . .?
 I see.  So you feel that really the, the  story came out . . .
 Of the check . . .
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. But it does seem as though if, if all the true story came out, you're just afraid of that.  That would mean you'd be put away for life.
 Hmm.  You must feel that the true story is pretty bad.
 Hmm?
 I see.  So that when . . . when he gets out, he's going to have to sort of face up to the true story.
 ‘Cause you won't have anything to do with it.
 But I guess that sounds as though you did have something to do with him in the past, but not in the future you won't.
 Hmm?
 Past, present and future's all settled.  Hmm.
 You really feel there's nothing you could look forward to.
 Uhm, hmm.  That's all there would be.
 You feel that isn't much of a future.
 So that, oh . . . I don't know.  Does that mean you're sort of afraid of him?
 Uhm, hmm.  Afraid he might really shoot you.  You feel he's pretty angry at you?
 Because of something you've done to him?
 I see.  You really didn't intend to  hurt him, but . . . you just intended to wake him up.
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. You weren't so successful in waking him up but you surely woke yourself up.
" Uhm, hmm.  Feel you could just ""break it up""."
" ""Break it up and put him away."""
 Uhm, hmm.
 I didn't hear that. I'm sorry.
 Rural schools.
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.  That's one of the things you'd like.
 Uhm, hmm.
 All the way what?
 That's other thing you wanted to do was to clean it up as far as the barn.   
 It's gonna be a highway.  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.  I guess I didn't say before, but I'm recording this so I can listen to it afterwards and try to understand    better what we talked  about.
 Is that all right with you?
 Mmm.  Are there any other things that you could tell me that would help me to know you a little better?  ‘Cause I don't know anything of your record or . . .
  Hmm?
 No. I really don't.
 No. I really don't know you. Just what you've told me now is what I know of you.
 It takes lots of expense and money to . . .
  Now there I'm not quite sure. To carry on such a performance . . .
 Uhm, hmm.
 Um, but really, there is something that, uh, troubles you at all, but you don't like to bring it out  because it would mean mentioning other people, and you feel it might do them . . .
 Uhm, hmm. So that, you think, is settled.
 But you feel, you wouldn't drink and not take care of your new clothes and so on, and you feel that your father wouldn't make a habit of drinking either.
 You're just fed up with something, but I couldn't quite get what it is that you're fed up.
 You're sick and tired of waiting for him to . . .
 But you feel you've really waited about as long as you can for your dad.
 To make up his mind. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
 You really get pretty mad when they take your clothes.  Is that it?
 Uhm, hmm. So you feel kind of cheated then ‘cause  you worked hard for them, and . . . Uhm, hmm.  But you sure don't like that.
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. You just believe that's not right   for people to take things.Uhm, hmm.
 Strictly a what?
 You're strictly a Conn, and not a Catholic?
 I don't think I know what a Conn is.  Can you tell me?
 I see.  So you're the kind of person that feels, “This is my property and don't you come in unless I invite you to.”
 Uhm,hmm.  Uhm,hmm.
 As far as coming in here, you weren't invited until…
 Uhm, hmm.  Things were sort of changed . . .
 And you feel that if anybody feels that you're just a baby, by gosh, you don't like that.
 You wanna be considered a higher woman.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. And I can't quite tell. Did you feel that I or Dr. Peterson felt you were a baby?  Is that... ?
 I see. I see. So that, yeah sure, maybe you cried. But that wasn't because you were a baby, it was because you were really fed up with things.
 Just waiting and standing here.
 Sitting and standing and waiting and waiting and waiting, huh?
 Uhm,hmm.  Uhm,hmm.
 You think you could get right down to business here and tell me what's really wrong?
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. You feel that, damn it, where you were, the trouble is that with you but it's also with the neighbors all knowing you too well.
 And if you could only get the heck out of there.
 Hmm?
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. Boy! I'd guess you'd like that.
 Uhm, hmm.  That's what seems important to you now is to go home and see. . . are, are the things you really like, your dog and the things you care about…  are they there.
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. You feel those things,  you feel those little things you hope and  think are really there.
 The possibility of what?
 Of losing the farm. Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.
 So that the real problem is you and you in that situation.
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.  So you're sort of stuck on that. Hmm?
 You just feel you have better standards than that.
 You won't let somebody else come . . .
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. You want things in the right order and you want a husband first before you have your child.
 You're saying it doesn't seem to you that that's too much to ask for.
 You're saying it doesn't seem to you that that's too much to ask for.
 It is?  Hmm.
  I see.
 So that . . . well, now wait a minute . . . let me, ‘cause I'd really like to understand this.  You feel anybody, if he is going to be your husband, would have to ask your dad and you can't change your dad.   Your dad is a mean person.
 And he,   would beat the tar out of you.
"  And you feel, ""I'm like my dad. I'm short-tempered too."""
 If he what?
 If… am I getting this right?  If, uh, somebody who was interested in being your husband touched the
 Boy!  He'd be knocked downstairs into the  cellar just like you?
 Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. Your dad just wouldn't put up with that.
 Hmm. You feel like, “Yes, he’s short tempered and he's mean. But still he's a real good father too.”   And I guess you feel, “Well, but I did run away from him. Now I've got to face the music, kind of.”
 Face the witnesses.  Uhm, hmm.  Sort of feel you're on trial, kind of.
 Hmm?
 Uhm, hmm.
 Uhm, hmm.  Anybody thinks things just run smoothly, well, they've got a lot to learn about farms. Uhm, hmm.
 Uhm,hmm.  Uhm,hmm.
 Uhm, hmm.  You…
 I'm not sure that I'm putting this together right, but you feel a man can't be perfect all the time. But, on
 I think so.  I guess the sense I make out of it is that, uh, you felt that someone, I don't know just who, wasn't perfect and you tried to put up with them as long as you could. But, boy! There was a limit to what you could take.
 Hmm.  And it wasn't quite clear to me whether this man, who wasn't perfect . . . are
 Any man.
 Uhm, hmm.
 Uhm, hmm.
 I see.
 I see.  Okay.
        So, maybe sometimes he goes on drunks, and so on, but, uh, you want it known that he'd be welcome in your house, that you care that much for your dad.
 Your mother also.  Uhm, hmm.  I wonder if, if you could tell me how you happen to be here? 'Cause I don't really know that.
 No, I don't.
 This is when you ran away, is that it?  Uhm, hmm.  You thought you'd go to Aunt Laurie's.  You feel that's kind of a crazy idea?
 Uhm, hmm. But you felt that things on the place were just kind’a going to pot and you couldn't stand it.  Was that it?
 Going to the dogs.  Uhm, hmm.  And this business about the stop sign, you feel that's awfully important.
 But, you really have very high standards for what you want there, don't you?  And you want it to be right?
 Uhm, hmm.  You feel things really should be done,  perfectly.
 They have to have their oats and their water just like what?
  Hum?
 Uhm, hmm.  Anything else you can tell me about you?
 That's about all, huh?
 Tell me, tell me, what's your first name?
 Elaine.  Uhm, hmm.  And how old are you Elaine?
 Sixteen.  How long have you been here?
 For several years.
 It just seems like ages and ages.
 Uhm, hmm. Well, I appreciate your talking with me. And maybe I'll have a chance to see you and say hello on the ward.
 Okay.
  You were kind of withering away inside?
  As an obstacle it’s pretty dangerous to you.
  Uhm hmm.
  Although you feel stronger than you did, you don’t feel strong enough to. . . .
  Uhm hmm.
  You’d like to be heard?
  You feel you are not heard and also you feel that if you were heard they would recognize some of the truth of what you feel.
  What is that shaking for you?  Can you get in touch with it?
  You really dread that they might be observing you?
  Your shaking is really fear.
  So you say you draw back from people you could share with?
  There’s a lot of pain there—pain about the past and pain about the present.
  You go so far and then what?  You close up, but why?
  “So don’t get too close because I don’t want really to be seen”. . . .Your eyes grow a little moist at the possibility of people really seeing you.
   Something you want very much and something you dread very much too.
  I’m wondering where you want to go next.
  If you really had the dream you want, you would probably like to be alone and you would really take off.
 You feel you have every reason to be content but that actually you are troubled by a number of uncertainties.
 Would you want to tell me a little bit more about that?
 You feel you have real ability, but finding a channel of expression, that's the problem, is that it?
 If you could only release the dam, and let some of the energy pour out, that might help?
 It always seems to you inwardly that you could create something much better that the things you see or read, but when you try anything of that kind, you simply can't put up with your own product.
 That is, others would think that you are doing a fine job, but as far as you're concerned you feel that the relationship with your children is not a genuine one.
 During that time you felt very satisfied and relaxed.
 That is, you mean there might be some physical  basis for part of these attitudes but that at any rate they are worse than they were formerly.
 During that period of pregnancy and so on, you didn't have to worry about creating, because you were creating and you didn't have to prove anything to others, is that it?
 You feel there is some truth to the notion that very rarely do you complete things.
 It's sort of disturbing to you to have all this before you, this example of real ability and solid achievement, is that it?
 There's an underlying sense of competition there, of wanting to prove your ability to him. 
 You don't like it when he claims a resemblance to his side of the family .
 You find her more satisfying and less upsetting to you.  You don't feel quite as much emotionally involved with her, is that it?
 It puzzles you what sort of factors could lie behind these times when you feel down.
 You found a real sense of achievement and contentment in that job and had respect for your own abilities.
 It was satisfying sexually, but you felt that it really wasn't a practical basis for marriage.
 You feel that you really took the initiative in that respect.
 If I understand that, you mean that losing your job really bowled you over, but you thought that having a youngster might help and you went ahead to do so in spite of psychiatric advice.
 You feel that you've sort of gone down hill since the birth of your second youngster, and that possibly you're feeling that pregnancy does not provide the answer that you thought it did .  I see that our time is up, perhaps we should stop for today.  Would you like to come back?
 I gather that that sense of inner peace and calm is what you would really hope might come out of these interviews.
 O.K.  I'll see you on ______ .
 I'd say---if you feel free to talk about the things that are of concern to you, then  we are most likely to make progress.
 ---I'm quite content to leave that to you, to talk about the things that you would like to talk about. .
 If you felt that was the situation, then I suspect probably you would wish to talk about it.
  It seems to keep bobbing up in your own thinking.
 Mhm.
 That was a disturbing---
 You felt very much alone emotionally.
 A very bad what?
 You realize particularly as you look back on it that you -- just did things like that  to -- ah --
 -- to try to win her? 
 Even at the time.  
 You took the idea from elsewhere, but at least it was calculating as far as you were concerned. .
 You felt very, very bitter about -- her -- ah -- relationship to your brother and --
 Basically she was -- selfish and neglecting.  .
 You felt that it was sort of your doom.
 Except when you were interested you...
 It makes you realize more clearly than ever what you missed when you were young.
 You felt then that you would do almost anything to gain status and somehow it links up with now.
 Yes.
 Mm-hm, yes.
 Difficult and not ultra-creative, but it was satisfying.
 Tired, but happy.
 If you could accept it now it might be satisfying, but now it's below your intellectual capacity.
 You felt that although that was rather a stormy period in your life, still a time of many satisfactions.
 You feel that your reactions against regimentation or having to do things probably ties back to the relationship with your mother.
 You begin to wonder how you get to a level, or kind of situation where it's effective in changing your own way of reacting.
 As long as it's new--
 And not routine.
 M-hm.
 You prevent yourself from enjoying something because you know you won't enjoy it pretty quickly.
 It would keep you from enjoying--
 You feel as though even the physical satisfaction depend a lot--
 M-hm.
 In many ways I take it that it hasn't been as satisfying.
 M-hm.
 You feel that the sensitivity of your reactions isn't as great.
 You feel that the sparkle has gone out of life and you certainly don't want that to go on in a permanent way.
 Complete apathy, huh?
 Just that itch for something that's--
 Not quite there--
 You just wonder how, how different your experience is from that of others.
 You're not just quite sure how to evaluate it within yourself.
 You felt that he was really trying to give you a way of--
 Of expressing yourself.
 You feel that it's the attitude behind all that that you want to get at.
 It was a satisfying conversation.
 You're beginning to see things' in rather different terms in the two of you.
 All in all, it's satisfactory, but somehow lacking in some of the peripheral--
 Refinements and adaptations of it.
 I will.
 Intellectually you can view it rationally--
 But emotionally you feel deeply hurt.
 You felt as though you weren't attractive.
 You feel that in several ways like that you do feel--
 Inferior.
 You feel that you couldn't come up to his standards.
 You value yourself less than you did awhile ago.
 Well, our time is up.  Ah--let's see, when shall we make the next appointment?  .
 Well, it is simply to help us in understanding the situation.  And then too, perhaps, you're wondering if it is used for other purposes.  We do occasionally use it for research, or for instruction, but it would be edited first, and all identifying information edited out.
 Ah--there are things that I do in order to be sure that I'm understanding what I am listening to in the interview, to be sure that I'm understanding what you are bringing out.  Possibly things may go on with you between contacts too, but if you mean--
 You are put a little bit on the spot in regards to--
 Perhaps understanding your own views of it.
 There are some things that go on after the interview itself closes.
 Catalytic?
 You feel it won't last.
 Somehow you don't want to kid yourself or oversell yourself on what's happening, but you feel some rather interesting changes in your own thinking.
 You'd throw a wet blanket over the creativeness.
 There didn't seem to be much residue of--
 That earlier experience.
 Even though there's little physical contact and it shouldn't matter so much, still these feelings are a little deep or strong.
 A sort of primitive violence sort of attitude.
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 You feel that--
 You have a very strong reaction to her, so that you feel that perhaps this deep hatred might go back to the physical affection, particularly, that you didn't get.
 Mhm.
 As your memory holds it, it was an experience of violent physical rejection, with definitely vulgar aspects to it.
  You have mixed feelings, that somehow you're her double.
 Not sure whether it's real or merely on an intellectual basis, but there's a feeling that there's some real element in it.
 So that even though you regard it, or regarded it as an exception, it was an awfully pleasant memory that for once she lived up to a promise she made.
 You have very little faith that people will live up to what they say they will do.
 So that even though with him your experience in that connection has been good, still  these same doubts come up.
 You feel that seeing it ought to make a difference.
   In a sense sort of proving it to you--
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 And yet you felt that it might be an attempt to rid yourself of some of the feminine aspects of yourself.
 And still some of your own behavior you feel is an attempt to wash her out of your experiences.
 That's something which you really felt--
 That experience wasn't traumatic, but still --
 It had some meaning for you --
 Impress?
 Impress your mother.
 You feel that there's no reason to try to impress and still you want very much to impress her.
 You feel that you are continually trying to show her....I can do this and I have done that.
 But there's that very contradictory feeling, always trying to impress her with the fact that you are very good, at the same time feeling doubtful.
 You feel she is inconsistent and all kinds of things in reality that would be terribly hard to take, and--
 Just your whole emotional self--
 M-hm.
 Really sort of a --
 You felt that you really gave her far more than you needed to.
 Partly for your own satisfaction.
 When she takes from you--
 Without your permission, that puts you in a rage.
 You're not quite sure why--
 A feeling not generally characteristic, but still when she--
 But your mother--
 Your time is about up.
 Suit you at the same time?
 You can just call and leave the message.
 You feel there's been a good deal of expression.
 You go right ahead.
 You feel that you can see that it functions to keep you from getting down to more concentrated effort or something that you should--
 You know it's perfectly foolish and still the fear is very, very real.
 You're sure that they would include themselves in that situation if you didn't protect yourself from them.
 More than just a slip.
 Mhm.
 You feel that that anxious watching certainly ties in with some of your present behavior, but still the explanation somehow doesn't click enough to do away with it.
 You think you may have felt guilty for your mother, is that it?
 You're not sure what it is, but the fact that you do somehow feel a little guilty of some angles, you feel pretty sure of that.
 You feel that she was guilty of your brother's death.
 So that your attitudes toward him have run quite a gamut from pretty strong hostility to feeling quite close.
 You felt a very great loss.
 Your feelings on things like that just meant nothing to her.
 She's a spiteful, hurting person.
 As far as you are concerned.
 We find people are very individual in that respect, but I do think there is a real chance of exploring it sufficiently to either find out what is the basis of it, or to help it assume a more normal proportion.
 There again, I think that we would find people very individual, but I suppose that you are wondering somewhat about that yourself or you wouldn't have raised the question.
 You're not quite sure whether you're--whether it's just an intellectualized notion, or if it's that there might be something of that in it, or whether it is your own feeling.
 So that in that situation and in this you feel as though you get close to an answer but pull away and get close again, but that the answer itself might be quite an awesome thing, huh?
 As though maybe you're getting close to something that--
 You feel as though that makes more puzzling this queasy feeling, because you feel quite ready to accept any impulse you find in yourself.
 Not even knowing what it is, you think if you saw it, you probably wouldn't be very frightened of it.
 You wonder whether you are conjuring up these things and also wondering whether you are going around in a circle.
 It means a great deal to you to be different, not just one of the gang, one of the mob.
 So that all at the same time you struggle to be different from and to keep from the mob, but at the same time you wish like everything you were immersed in the group.
 And that pressure, as I understand it--As I get it, what you would most like would be able to be creative without too much attention as to whether or not it was the creation.
 If you could express yourself freely it would do a great deal for you, but the block that keeps you from it, as I get it, is the feeling that if you express yourself it's got to be just the one.
 Actually the motivation is very different from being lazy.
 You pay a large price psychologically to be that different person.
 You think the struggle doesn't quite pay off, that you aren't as unique as you would have to be to be satisfied with that aspect of it.
 You prized very highly her, her belief in your originality, even though inwardly you felt--
 You felt that wasn't so.
 That is unless you could feel that it was so far superior as to be really outstanding--
 You can't bring yourself to do a little better.
 You felt as if you let yourself go a little bit more than you had been.
 You feel that by the lower standards in your mother you were pretty outstanding, but by your standards you don't measure up at all.
 You know that underneath that rationalization is that feeling that you want to be there but you feel you can't.
 You don't know whether that thing leads to--
 To unique creative ability or just following the mob--
 But you feel that either of those would be better than being in between--
 You don't have a very high estimate of yourself.
 You either swing to one extreme or the other.
 Mostly the lower extreme.
 Circumstances really proved to you that you really were outstanding and that affected you so you felt pretty darned good.
 This passion for being outstanding is really a sickness.
 Well, I see our time is up.
 Saturday at 10?
 OK.
 Is it that it is more of a feeling that you thought you wanted to create rather than you want to create?
 That you ought to want to practice.
 The conversation with your friend made you feel that you might find some kind of solution to that attitude.
 You might or might not have a real desire to create, behind that feeling.
 You can't really enjoy the things that are in that book because you keep thinking - I ought to be doing, or I could do this, or do it better.
 You feel that's the real heart of the thing, the general issue -
 On the one hand you feel up to the steeple, and on the other hand you feel way down in the basement.
 Mhm.
 It left you feeling down and that feeling didn't go away.
 Mhm.
 Oh, I think it is pretty well accepted that pretty often it does have, certainly it differs with different individuals.
 She reacts to it.
 It's astonishing how - how close that chemical equation is.
 The general attitude was bad enough, but your mother made it even worse.
 You felt you were already condemned in intent and if so, what the hell.
 It was almost a means of expressing your impatience and irritation at yourself, at times, is that it?
 You really thought that here she was facing a situation similar to the ones you had to face and using masturbation as a means of meeting it.
 You really felt somehow you'd let her down. -
 or failed her in some way.
 She reopened the whole business.
 You thought that you could explain it to him in such a way that even he could accept it, but so far as you were concerned, you couldn't.
 You felt that you had to find some way of stopping her without just stopping her directly, but -
 - even though you were more successful at that, you were still not successful at meeting the other problems.
 Gradually you have been able to - try to let her work out her own problems.
 You feel you really do accept it now far more than you did.
 You accepted the masturbation and you have not used her for your own ego satisfaction -
 - and it made a difference.
 Somehow, you're further apart from her.
 You feel affection for her but still you've been able to feel that she's another person.
 You and Evelyn and your mother somehow are all almost one psychologically.
 You're not at all certain of the meaning of it, but all you know is it has puzzled you, it has happened, and somehow there seems to be a tie-up.
 You almost seem to live inside her skin too.
 You feel again all the conflicts about your own ability and your mother in regard to Evelyn.
 I'm not sure.
 You realize that you'll be trying to guide yourself in your own childhood through her in her childhood and you know that isn't good and will bring hurt to her and to you.
 Mhm.  In other words it's doubly frustrating to think about that kind of angle.
  You feel a person who has written a book or done something like that has something to look at and something to feel satisfied about where you haven’t.
 I really don't know -
 Because on that sort of problem I doubt if there would be any averages or any real information.
 It makes you sort of puzzled about your own - ah - you wonder whether sexually there is anything wrong with your thinking and attitudes if you have been having those dreams.
 So there may be some - ah - some pulls in both directions there against being feminine and also to prove to yourself that you are feminine.
 The feeling of wanting to be different might tie in with the feeling of wanting to be different from women.
 You feel that you would be much more content for a man to be like other men than you are for yourself to be like other women.
 Mhm - You're worried that even if you do accept more openly some of those possible attitudes and impulses within yourself, where do you go from there?
 You feel that in a number of ways you might be in the middle, but it's all mighty hard to make the choice between.
 That's a really deep question.  Whether you stay in the middle or go on the - one side or the other, can you do any of these things with satisfaction and contentment, I mean how to discover the channels which will be satisfying.
 Mhm...I see our time is up.
 You like it better?
 Well, I'm not sure about that last, but I can certainly--that is, you do feel a little puzzled by the fact that it's gotten to be a source of friction.
 You differ pretty basically on your notions of psychological factors and you feel you have to justify yourself by drawing on authorities.
 It sounds as though you are fairly sure in your own mind that that sort of argument about it isn't getting very far.
 So you believe that you will try that idea.
 You respect and like Arnold's masculinity and the fact that he does have strong interests and so on, but there's regret that you--ah--have a lack of common cultural interests.
 You felt that was something that wouldn't help your relationship with him, to talk it over.
 You see many evidences of psychological factors at work in him, but you've discovered it doesn't pay to try to tell him of them.
 You feel that although he has some of these problems in him still he has achieved a pretty nice balance, ah, in living, and you can't understand how he can feel inadequate on that basis.
 You think now you do realize that, ah, satisfaction has been greater for you where you were the predominant person.
 At one time there was satisfaction too in really being dominated, but, ah, it hasn't been lasting.
 Your understanding a lot of these things somehow hasn't made a difference in your own reaction to them or your behavior in relation to them.
 You think that understanding becomes a focus of too much of your attention.
 In other words, you realize from that experience that a threat to your femininity can be a terrible blow.
 You see both elements of yourself pretty sharply, where on the one hand you may be more of a woman than you think you are, and on the other hand that you have pretty masculine interests along some lines.
 You just felt excluded by both groups, sort of in-between.
 This might tie in with this in-betweeness which you feel.
 You feel that you could only give the impression perhaps of being more mellow, that some of the things have been driven inside--
 And still are there.
 So that you resent her not only for her efficiency and her struggle to take over Bonnie but perhaps even more deeply because she is a mother.
 It's not a question, you mean, but it's to know how to go at it--because you see yourself all that I would see there--ah you might get rid of her because she represents your mother and you dislike her, or conceivably you might be able to adjust to her, which would certainly be a step toward adjusting to your mother, but, ah--
 You feel pulled two ways by it, as you do with your own mother.
 You're afraid that she might transfer her affection and loyalty.
 You really were pretty deeply confused by that whole issue and consequently not able to organize yourself very effectively.
 It might help to get it out of your system.
 It's a very overpowering feeling of all the emotions about her.
 You feel it's just a disease.
 You'd like to understand that situation and the only meaning you can see is a desire to degrade your mother perhaps, but even seeing that or wondering if that isn't the explanation doesn't remove all the whole problem.
 You don't know about those things and you wonder if you read more into them than ought to be.
 All you know is that you really have that feeling that there are times when you think you will just burst.
 You'll be spread all over and nothing more will be left.
 You felt that it was an inevitable experience that would happen.
 You have the feeling very strongly.
 The feeling you have is both a notion of power over her and love for her but also the urge to destroy that over which you have power and which you love.
 All you know is that you have those feelings and also that it would be better if you could get them out.
 Yes, I think it is.
 Ah, Saturday?
 No, I wasn't, I was down seeing my son.
 Yes, I have a daughter.
 Mhm.
 You feel kind of doubtful as to whether or not you can get the answers within yourself, so it is more like playing a game within yourself.
 Well, I can really understand that kind of question or questions.  All that I could say is that a good many people do find it very helpful, but, ah, I can also understand that for one person that leaves the question, will this be helpful for me?
 You feel that you could really accept and follow a suggestion that somebody would hand down to you from above -
 But that you pretty deeply distrust your own decisions.
 I think so, that is you'd like it best if someone else took at least a part of the lead and there were questions and answers, and the person could follow some of those leads.
 What you would really like is the answer to the question, will it help me --
 And at the same time you realize that that's impossible, that no one could actually give you that answer and that no amount of general information on the fact that it has been helpful to someone else would really get at that, would really get your question, 'would it help me?'
 You feel that unless a person has gone through that kind of graduated experience he just isn't entitled to an opinion.
 So he was really digging at you because you have, ah, stood for a definite course of action in this respect.
 He didn't win the argument, but nevertheless it has made you feel doubtful yourself as to, ah, where this is getting you or can get you.
 Mhm.
 In other words, in spite of a number of very good obstacles you find that your behavior somehow has made the decision for you about coming here rather than what you think about it, in a sense, -
 You find yourself coming even though -
 So there's some uncanny force operating.
 She's the same, but you really found a difference in yourself.
 Sometimes you can take some of those instances, particularly with the baby, with more composure than you could before.
 It was the fact that you did find an answer within yourself there which was effective in a particular situation that has real significance for you.
 You think you kind of realized that you weren't disturbed with men,
 --where you would have been with woman.
 You really felt very much at ease and free.
 In other words if you had been prepared for it, if you had been trying to measure up to a certain standard, then you would have been self-conscious and a little bit ill at ease, -
 Definitely more proper and less free.
 Mhm.
 That really was fairly close to your real self, or the self you would like to be.
 You feel that it really was the first time, or one of the first times that you stood as   yourself, more or less against Arnold or at least without reference to what he might think about it.
 It sort of starts a vicious circle.
 That feeling wasn't there.
 You really feel less dependent on him and more able to, ah, be yourself apart from him.
 In other words it wasn't something that was planful or that you were very conscious of at the time or afterwards.
 It is just that you have a different feeling and association with the whole business
 That's what you are wondering, anyway.
 You really found it was possible for you to put words on paper, but that it also became pretty upsetting because you didn't think it was good.
 There was  lot of confusion and so on, but out of it too a feeling that perhaps it doesn't have to be perfect.
 You just weren't well organized afterwards.
 You feel there is a great gap between the perfection of the story as it existed in your mind and-
 And you feel sort of sad when it comes out of the typewriter.
 Perhaps it always is a struggle to -
 -to transform the perfection of the thing as it exists in the mind into something that looks even reasonably good on paper.
 You're trying to do it without struggle and you really know that struggle is absolutely necessary for it.
 I think I do.  You wonder whether you have problems because you lack discipline or whether it's a lack of discipline that's-
 Causing you to have problems.
 You'd be willing to make the struggle and put in the effort.
 You mean you'd like that same effect of completion and finish and so on.
 You really want the orgasm without the pregnancy.
 Is it something real in you, or is it just some notion you picked out of a book and put together.
 You feel a basic unsureness about your own thinking.
 In other words some of these ideas that come are satisfying and meaningful, but there still lurks in your mind a notion that they might be bubbles.
 You feel quite sure that it does have meaning to you.
 Our time is up.
 You felt pretty strong feelings against him.
 You feel more independent of him and that has given a different flavour to it.  Your thinking of leaving him is not just to hurt him.
 It might be temporary, but at any rate it's strong at the moment.
 Certain sections have been...
 ....dealt with, really.  I take it when you say blocked off you mean stabilized.
 But that still leaves plenty of uncertainty and turbulence but on a somewhat higher level.
 While your need is still desperate, but nevertheless, ah.....
 That is, you'll keep stabilizing one part after another until the turbulence doesn't bother you, because it doesn't exist.
 You feel pleased to get rid of some of these excessive things.
 Sort of necessary to load up too much and then to get rid of it.
 You require and get satisfaction out of clearing away what you have piled up.
 I believe it is a symbol of something, but I think the person himself is the only one that basically knows what it is symbolical of.
 You're wondering if you could do it, but the point is that I doubt very much that someone outside could know just what that symbolized for you.
 Somehow that ties up with a mysterious something that is very powerful.
 There's another possible tie-in somewhere.
 That's really new.
 It's really fearful to find such attitudes in yourself.
 You are trying to find that out as you work your way through them.
 Yes, I see.
 M-hm.
 M-hm.
 It really set you to feeling that it wasn't your child, but was just Arnold's child.
 You feel that somehow that surprise at the fact that she didn't belong to you sexually, that concern about sexual identification, set off a lot of other things.
 You can't understand quite why those ideas would come or why those dreams would come but it's a little bit frightening, some of the things you find in yourself.
   You definitely want not to look anything like any reasonable facsimile of them.
 You're really disgusted with them and yet in some ways you feel....
 Someone else might liken you with them.
 Just a continual struggle and conflict over whether or not you belong with them.
 It affected you so that it was hard to find an outlet for your feeling.
 It seems as though your hands really have the potentialities that you'd like to have and that you'd like to put into effect.
 If your head or heart were really geared to your hands....
 You're not even sure whether you have the right to try to be creative and to express yourself.
 You feel as though that creative interest is just there ready to go if someone would give it the push.
 You're very, very fearful of giving yourself the push.
 If you could really open up those channels, that would -- a lot of things would get worked out there as well as the creative aspect, huh?
 You have really tried very hard to get some teacher or some group to give you the push and it all ends up in feeling depressed and defeated.
 Knowing before you finish it you'll be depressed.
 Always the creativeness is there and never quite expressed.
 So it described the kind of person you feel you are.
 It seems very few people see through the front, but you know darn well that it is a front.
 So the future doesn't look like much.
 You feel that in every way you're....
 You feel that you are sinking into the tomb and yet at the same time you feel you are making some strokes on the walls.
 You feel as though most of existence is futile.
 You're not even sure of that. 
 Buying for the future.
 You feel underneath that both sides of that are pretty real.  I mean that your desire to buy and get lots of this future, and at the same time the impulse to get rid of it.
 Okay.
 Well, I suppose that the present attitude could be summed up by saying that, ah, it's the attitude on the part of all concerned rather than the physical fact that is important.
 Mhm.  It really is a very practical and personal issue so far as you are concerned, what suggestions to make about it, and what reactions to take.
 It's hard for you to know whether that is the thing to do.
 Mhm.
 Then you're thinking that in your own opinion it seems a little excessive.
 And you feel that the extent to which she is doing it is a little excessive.
 You don't know just what to do.
 So that personally you could accept it for her and feel that it's all right, but it's social reverberations -
 Well, I think the, I think the answer I would give there is I'm satisfied that people can handle such things in quite different ways without having difficulty, if their own attitude toward it is assured and I think -
 Well, now you're raising a question, I hadn't thought of that.
 Mhm.  You've faced the situation with so much careful thought on the matter of her security -
 You've tried so hard to keep that satisfactory that it really is bothering to have her, ah, show evidence of need like masturbation.
 So you really feel that you have worked through some of those attitudes and it does make a difference in your relationship and, ah, so that's one of the things that still puzzles you in regard to Evelyn too, that your attitude toward her has changed some-what, and, ah, why hasn't it showed up more-
 in her behaviour?
 You feel that you are sort of permitting her to do something wrong but keeping it from the rest of the group.
 Mhm.
 You think that maybe your own attitude toward it is somewhat divided.
 Certainly the attitudes of your childhood, attitudes imposed on you in childhood do influence present thinking and would be slow to change.
 Mhm.
 Just as in childhood, ok my personality is going to dissolve and go to the dogs anyway, therefore I can do the things I want, so now you feel something akin to that in regard to ah, some of the aspects of your life.  If you hurried up and got old, why, ah, then some things wouldn't matter so much.
 You could do the comfortable things.
 In a sense it would be, in some respects a relief to be old and not have to put that extra effort into it.
 You feel that really you are very conscious of all aspects of yourself that exemplify femininity.
 So you both reject the word and also feel a very painful sensation-
 Your sensory sensations just run very deep with you,
 - as in that case - you have the feeling that excretions from the eyes just nauseate you.
 It doesn't taste good now.
 You feel that the intellectual analysis comes afterwards and I take it isn't so awfully satisfying either.
 You think that your intellectual functioning is below the par of a lot of people that you come in contact with.
 So again it's something quite different from the evidence.  Intellectual evidence would point in other directions, but your feeling about it is a feeling of real inadequacy and a feeling of not measuring up.
 You feel kind of stupid when you see someone else able to grasp the thing just from hearing it and you –
 In other words, while you are listening, you are also comparing.
 Mhm
 You feel, you feel that you are living by the standards others have and what they think of you and so on, even though more deeply you know that you can't possibly have happiness that way.
 And you just don't feel sure of your own judgment or your own standards.
 What you would like to do, if you can believe the dream, is to just create at whatever level, whatever comes naturally.
 And, ah, enjoy some of the satisfactions that now outwardly at least you scorn, but the reason you can't do that kind of thing is that you fear the evaluation others might make.
 I'd like to interject, I was late this morning, we do have until ten of the hour.
 It had a fascination for you that in some way was tied in with the same fascination in the dream.
 The essence of that dream seems to be the serenity you feel in yourself by yourself somehow.
 Not even in the dream?
 That's what I meant, in the dream.  That would be a perfection of the dream.
 A feeling in the dream of being overwhelmed and in danger, lost or almost lost.
 The whole meaning of it was pretty clear to you.
 So that you have felt independent and, ah, temporarily not much need of him and then more recently  you felt a closer relationship and that feeling of dependence and that dependence means insecurity.
 You feel that when you feel independent it really is because, ah, you feel asexually independent.
 When you feel insecure about the better sexual relationship, it might be because it hits you kind of hard that that stresses the fact that you are a woman with a woman's needs.
 You are inclined to think that perhaps you're on the fence and pulled both ways.
 So you really would like someone to somehow force you into an acceptance of the womanly role.
 In some ways he helps in that struggle, but at other points he really tends to make you feel more inferior.  I guess our time is up.
 I already have it down for 1 o'clock next Tuesday.
 Well, what today?
 That certainly is up to you, anything you feel you want to talk about you are certainly free to talk, -
 We don't probe into anything unless you want to talk about it.
 It seemed like it was kind of a cheat, and something that you could get anywhere.
 It was a very real feeling in yourself and that's why you wanted to bring it out.
 Just listen to your troubles.
 M-hm.  So that the feelings that you had about the fact that after all, why a person with any professional training just listens and so on, and the feelings you had about this being sort of a fraud, you recognize them as being in part perhaps connected with your own irritation and fear at having to face things within yourself.
 At least it means that your feelings are definitely mixed.  I mean if it -
 - if you were pretty sure this was a fraud, you wouldn't be coming.
 You feel that somehow there is a conflict of some sort between what you are doing here and the Freudian thinking that you felt a real affinity toward.
 No, I haven't, but I know - I haven't read that particular book.
 So that you are wondering whether some type of intellectual commitment to a theory is necessary to get some good out of continuing interviews.
 And it's rather, rather deeply disturbing to find that something that you felt was absolutely true you now find yourself really questioning, is that it?
 Sort of disturbing, but it also contains an element of challenge and you feel that it might be a sign of greater maturity.
 Even though it's good its not perfect because you can't be sure all the way through.
 Can't enjoy the moment because you have no guarantee that the moment will continue forever.
 M-hm.  Pretty deep anxiousness about what comes next.
 In other words, it's hard to enjoy the good because, after all, what may happen next could be very bad.
 M-hm.  Always a sense of impending doom, sort of -
 Always first one has to look out for the things that could, ah, bring things crashing down more or less, or at least could change happiness to unhappiness.
 M-hm.  You feel that there was a very real sense of impending doom that time that might tie in with some of this attitude of your own.
 This time the cycle has been quite contrary to what it has usually been and you have been feeling good before coming in and upon getting close to it feel-
 Depressed and dubious.
 The test of being thrown back on your own resources really wasn't a test.
 So that in several respects, both by that comparison and by comparing last week with 8 or 10 weeks ago you feel lots of progress, but, ah, still you have other feelings along with that.
 You really enjoyed the relationship instead of being more restless at the time.
 M-hm.  Nothing new in the thing, but in the attitude and feeling about it.
 That is, you were trying to steer her away from the things, I suppose you mean by that imaginary, steer her away from the things that you thought were serious mistakes for you, that later you have re-evaluated somehow, is that it?
 I see.
 M-hm.  You don't feel quite so much concern or depression about the extent to which the hands have created.
 Just a general feeling that your abilities are such that there should be some creative results from them.
 M-hm.  You want her to achieve, you don't want to just, ah, live your life through hers, you don't want to say that your own creative capacity is over and done with.
 Restricted and restricted.
 Your chance to utilize your abilities disappointingly fizzled and your work was restricted and so on.
 You feel that you almost followed a road that would have lead to a great deal of creativity.
 A little bit the power behind the throne notion.
 You feel there is a real fork there, in a sense, that is whether to throw over the home angle or head for a career or just what.
 In other words, logically the thing would be some type of compromise in which you found creative possibilities, but, ah -
 You feel you can't carry on with that line.
 Then in a sense you're staying at a distance from the one outlet you'd most like to develop in, trying to --
 You feel that you intentionally or quite purposefully stick to the avenues that really don't promise the most.
 Perhaps in small ways you are finding some -
 You feel really there you have a more subtle and perhaps more significant idea as far as getting children to really appreciate music.
 M-hm.  But you'd like to develop some of that appreciation in her too.
 Yes.
 You find yourself disintegrating, do you ? 
 You seem a little bit tense and a little bit stirred up.
 You sometimes feel as though you would be on exhibition in some ways.
 And you experience that as a terrific fear about putting your own abilities out in the open, is  that it ?
 Objectively it was good, but you felt and knew that it wasn’t the, it wasn't as good as you had performed for yourself.
 Yes, it is.
  You suffered for him and with him.
  So that it was always unsuccessful or disappointing when you performed for others, and you felt you deserved it.
  You admire that complete plugging and persistence....
 …..through failure to success.
 You feel he may have other difficulties, but he has found a pretty satisfying solution through this type of application to his work.
  Instead of working things out in other ways he worked it out through his work.
 Someday you’ll pry things out of me.
  Surely.
  Pretty satisfying to have some type of achievement that you can feel and that's what you really want.
  M-hm. You can't quite see why that's the only area where you really do the plugging, and have the patience and the tolerance of failure and so on, and achieve success.
 M-hm. It just somehow doesn't quite fit into the same category of plugging effort. It's more....
  .... more of a pleasurable thing.
  At least in that respect you wish you could plug like he does.
 That is, for you you feel if you could get to that place of having .. attitudes towards some sort of work, so that you were willing to invest yourself in it and work toward an end that you saw clearly, you feel that would take care of a lot of things.
 So that in that experience you had no lack of persistence, but you realized the reason for it in part was that you, didn't have to create and you could be a copyist.
 If I get that, at the present time you feel you attach too much importance to the perfection or non-perfection of the product, what you would like to.... is more of a focus on the satisfactions of the process, is that it?
 You really know pretty clearly what you want.
 That goal of having work — which you are satisfied to do and and an attitude toward the outcome that would be realistic and not too much concerned with the public opinion or the perfection.
 You feel your hands are sort of being held in leash until you release them and turn them loose, hm?
  You get discouraged and you also get to feeling that your problems shouldn't be so important in view of all the total social situation, but still your problems do have importance.
 Just to forget all the striving, it seems as though that would be very pleasant.
 You feel that there would be lots of advantages to being a placid cow, huh?
      I really don't think we're wise enough to say. It's a way of helping people and how it fits in with other ways of helping people I think the client has got to solve. I don't really believe that any, I don’t really think I would know how to answer that question.
 M-hm.
 Well, I think again....
" That's the thing you are wondering, and I don't think a general answer would, ah, be satisfying, what you really are wondering is, I presume, ""Can this help in my situation?"""
 And you really have wondered a good deal how, how close you are to the line of abnormality or....
 …..or what the future would hold on that.
 M-hm. Things like sudden blank spots and such strong impulses against others make you really....
 …..worry about yourself.
 You feel that there has been somewhat more of an upsurge of affectionate feelings but whether when you meet, your hair will stand on end and you will just feel she's an old bitch for sure. 
 It really seamed like your mother made over in the direction you would want her to be rnade over.
 It helped you to realize that aside from your mother's objectionable qualities, you also do have a very strong affection toward her.
 Focussed on Aunt Thelma, but your affection and the feeling you felt were toward your mother, hm?
 You really enjoyed that wholesome love for your mother.
 Only because?
 You could only love her obliquely.
 You feel that you can only like her when she is a long ways away.
 No, I don't think quite along that line.
  Yes, interesting and very revealing of personality.
 It's sort of given you a deeper understanding and a little more objectivity in a situation like that.
 You think that it has also the possibility of insecurity in that, that there is in any other loves.
 You feel that change might be an illusion, or even when you seem to know the changes are real they might also be just temporary, I mean they might just slip right back to where you were, when you stop coming in.
 You feel too, I take it, that somehow what is happening is a change of philosophy in your approach to the thing, not a neat solution of problems.
 And your mother hasn’t changed.
 There’s still plenty of….
 …attitudes that you are concerned about, but, ah, some things do look differently.  I guess our time is up. 
 You have the jitters.
 That feeling may be temporary, but at any rate you felt that you were reacting very differently than before.
  You didn't even have to fight back at that sort of thing, it just didn't make much difference.
 So that the same old things were happening that certainly had happened before, but you looked upon them in a new perspective.
 Well, I don't know that it's usual. Evidently it has been something that has been happening to you.
  At any rate it has produces a great amount of tension  and a real difficulty in various areas of your relationship.
 So that, ah, you feel that initially you were pretty dependent on him but after all that had a lot of satisfying aspects,  that in many respects it is disappointing to see that change.
 So that somehow, at least recently, you feel that you've died sexually.
  You feel probably, at a stage, and when you work through some of the other things that are perhaps in the background that that may straighten out too.
  You sound blasé, but actually it concerns you a good deal, and your marriage means a good deal to you.
  The quarrelling and friction concern you, but the kind of price that you know you could probably pay and, uh, to cover the situation somewhat is a price you don't want to pay - to be more feminine or to be more charming, and so forth.
  Although it sounds as though you are a little reluctant to say so, you just feel that you have stopped loving him and that shows up in this sexual way  particularly. You seem to have a very strong feeling of deadness.
 So you see signs of what looks like real progress, and then in your married life aspect of it particularly, you feel perhaps you've really gone backward.
 Before it was a fight but with the perfectly well known feeling behind it that after all there would be a making up period afterwards  and now it’s to the place where you mean it.
  You feel that the outcome is in some sense better than it used to be, because, uh, you didn't get all wrapped up emotionally in a way that would continue and continue, but you feel also it contains too large, an element of just plain indifference, is that it?
  You are beginning to wonder whether you will catch the final bulge  At least it may be a generalized feeling about men right now.
  Then maybe the answer lies in finding a new type of life in yourself, particularly sexual life.
 So, it's always a question of proving that question one way or the other to yourself.
 It just has lost that highly special significance that it used to have.
 As you feel it, before you might after all have been trying, even with Arnold to prove your attractiveness, femininity and sexual attraction and so on, and that now, not needing to prove that so much, somehow it has gone over into a frigidity which you feel is, uh more abnormal.
 If you couldn't find sexual satisfaction that would be failure of a very deep sort.
 I take it you feel at any rate that this is breaking into some fairly deep ground at the present time.
 It's a question that is awfully hard to answer. We've discussed that a lot among ourselves. It's more than just listening like a post, that's very certain.  and that it's also something short of, uh, suffering right, with the person, I mean –
  It's really something quite different than most relationships.
 There's more constancy, somehow.
     Would it be that, and here let me ask a question, would it be that, uh, you have no real basis for knowing my opinion about it and therefore possibly it helps you to realize that those attitudes are within yourself and that you fluctuate in regard to them?
      A little satisfying and a little bit dissatisfying, the feeling-
 That somehow here you can be the real you.
 Well, I don't know on that, I know that a good many people have the same reaction that you do that this is the place in which, uh, they can really be themselves and that that seems to be pretty deeply significant.
 Mostly yourself has been tossed by the waves and only once in a while you get kind of a glimpse of what it might be otherwise.
 In some respects that was the deepest attitude of inferiority which you had or the starting one.
 You've had a lot of training in making you feel that, size was a very important question.
 He's actually a biologist but he has done a great deal of work in the area of sex, the field of sexual histories and the habits of human beings.
 It was reassuring, but the reassurances didn't entirely wipe out your own concern.
 OK
 Well, I'll see you on the __th.
 I wouldn't be able to take her on myself, if that’s what you mean  But I think it would be possible to make an appointment for her with one of the counselors here.
 Well, at the moment, yes, I will, primarily because of the vacation situation coming on, I think that, uh, if he's able to see her that Mr. X would-
 OK, or you can talk to Mrs. G. at the desk and see if you can make an appointment for her to see Mr. X on that date
    You were really able to get out in the open some of the things that—
      I’m not quite sure that I do, but that you were venturing into new ground yourself  as you told him,—
 Flaws?
 In other words, you discovered your defensive statement had aroused another defensive  statement from him and both of you were taking those statements seriously.
 There were compensating factors that more or less covered it over but still there was that  underlying doubt and feeling of inadequacy.
 It really was the battle of the sexes.
 You have really just been going through a very deep experience of seeing a lot of things more clearly.
 You feel that was getting pretty close to—
 So you felt that you saw much more deeply into his feelings about this whole situation too.
     You have always been fearful of any initiative because it might be rejected  and you would be rejected along with it.
 So it isn't a question, really of the statement, it's the fact that you feel you are on a real basis where you can talk things out and if attitudes change, or those opinions weren't real ones you could discover what the real ones are.
 You felt the strain of keeping a self that wasn't quite your natural self,  a relationship that wasn't quite a natural relationship.
 You feel that might have been, at least in part, an attempt to prove to him that though you were deficient in some respects, still you  could be creative in other respects.
     Certainly possible.
    It really is something awfully exhilarating to discover some of the truth about your relations and to feel that you can do something about that, is that what you mean?
    You find that you can feel much freer with him than you have in the past.
     So that from every external point of view you ought to be irritable and down in the mouth.
     Just seems as though you can take life more calmly  or more steadily.
 For a permanent relationship a reaction like that isn't the best basis.
     You really just felt able to shoulder the responsibilities even though they were a good deal heavier than usual,
      And that didn't panic you.
 You can't quite be sure, it might be temporary or it might not be the real basis, it might not be as good as it looks.
 So there is that lingering doubt in your mind, still on the other hand as you look at it as squarely as you can, it looks like the real thing.
 You are pretty sure, now, that your change in attitude towards your mother is real and that is one more bit of bolstering evidence you’re your new relationship with Arnold is real.
 You accept them more but it's still kind of a mystery as to why you have some of those attitudes toward her.
 Some of the things that seemed very real as you went along, you look back on them and feel they really weren't very real except in the sense perhaps of being surface symptoms of some other things.
 Even in that respect you're—
 Mhm. You're not as emotionally tied up in that situation.
 You could admit both sides of your attitude.
 That's a part of your personality that you really would prize and value, you wouldn't expect  or hope to change that.
 It's more than interesting, it's fascinating.
 Yes 
 You're in the process, at least, of building a security that you didn't have before.
 Now, you were talking yourself out to him.
 You just hadn't believed that it would be possible to express your real attitudes and be accepted and understood by him.
 That you really do have an obligation to provide some security for him.
 It isn't so necessary to prove something as it was before.
 Well, I don't know, I haven't gotten—
     You want to feel quite sure that you are really through before you quit.
 By and large you feel that you are getting close to the end.
     Just the way you are determining.
     When you are ready to call it quits, why we'll call it quits.
     Oh yes, if you feel you want to.
     Oh, yes, yes. We don't close the door and lock it, we just say goodbye and if you want to get in touch with me again, why feel free to do so.
     Sometimes it is  sometimes not, I mean, it's interesting—
     Getting to the point where you had to do something about the whole business.
     To be able to admit what you regarded as your deepest weakness.
     Just started the ball rolling.
     The worst is known and accepted.
 It’s really better.
 Even though they are taken care of, still you feel very anxious about them.
 Somehow you feel more guilty than the circumstances would seem to warrant, but then perhaps the thought that you are leaving Evelyn with someone who doesn’t like her or might not like her. . . .
 You feel that you really have no business taking time off from your primary responsibilities.
 You feel you have to earn your time off to that extent, and then are not able to take it freely.
 That has come more into focus as some of the other things, have uh, subsided or been taken care of wholly.
 So you have placed your security out in them and therefore it could be scuttled at any time they left or didn’t live up to your expectations.
 That is, your feelings of fear really go beyond what would be justified by the actual circumstances.
 That even though you have met the challenge created when you haven’t had the maid, still when they are there you have to keep satisfying them so that they won’t desert you.
 You’ve come to feel that these various outside things can’t possibly satisfy the anxiety or the drive within you, so you look at them rather differently.
 It no longer looks quite so much as though the pot of gold is always at the end of the rainbow.
 It has really enabled you to get more satisfactions out of the present than you have otherwise been able to do.
 You feel some change along those lines but there is still a strong desire to have plenty of security in the basic necessities.
 The fact that you sensed that she had the same condition, the same antagonism that you had, made you feel more sure in some way that you would. . . .
 That’s what kept you from being anxious about her.
 I take it that it also interests you that that is something you are just telling me for my information.  It’s something you’ve worked through and solved and you just bring it up as a matter of information.
 Before you thought of her almost as vicious and vulgar,  and now you think of her as a very gorgeous person.
 It’s gone.
 There’s more steadiness in the fluctuation, than too extreme.
  You are still doing a lot of work on yourself and you hope the time will come when that can fade in the background more,  and your interests can be directed outside yourself.
 It’s pretty central to yourself, but you think it doesn’t have to be true of the future.
 You feel confidence in your appearance and your attractiveness.
 In other words, although you have feelings on it still it is something you can look at quite objectively and it doesn’t become quite so personalized.
 A real loyalty and a real hatred all mixed in.
 You feel very strongly against those who are Jewish and who do have objectionable . . . .  . . . . traits.
 A real sense of loss when you feel that they are not -- that Bonnie, for example, is not so Jewish in characteristics.
 Just waiting for the noise, hm?
 Problem that extends beyond what we can clear up here.
 So that you really would like to become more articulate and more effective and do some little thing for the things that you believe.
 You feel that you know the answers within yourself, but to articulate them or to express them that’s  where you are blocked by the emotion.
 In other words here when you’ve gone pretty deep, or even where you weren’t entirely sure yourself what you felt yet you found you could express yourself clearly.
 You feel that some day you will be able to express the things you really think.
 In other words the terrific drive to create is gone and yet you find yourself creating.
 You feel somehow you are more effective than you were.
 You feel more positive, more organized.
 Our time’s about up.
 M-hm.  Next Friday we’ll have to talk about appointments from there on because my schedule changes.
 It's really an unusual thing for you.
 Except for the dreams everything has been going  well.
 The schedule will overcome the apathy.
  You feel that it's not so much the answer he gave as the fact that he knows the answers that really gets you riled.
   That wasn't the way you had handled him.
 So that you were able to have a strong difference and still handle it in a way that seemed quite good to you and certainly worked out better.
 It isn't a flickering flame.
 A more steady kind of satisfaction even in the everyday elements.
 You can cease looking so much for outside change because you can find more of it within, perhaps.
 As far as you can see the elements in the dream seem to be an acceptance of that unusual behavior as far as you are concerned. And a feeling that perhaps she might or should come to have a similar acceptance.
 You could see in her the coarser or unacceptable aspects of yourself, is that it?
 That catches another angle, it was as if you feared that she was like this other aspect of you or that you had some qualities like that.
  It helped you to realize, as I get it, that, uh, it was in a sense that, aspect of yourself which had repulsive elements —
 It was another aspect of yourself which was so engaged.
 The dreams themselves were very disturbing.  Is it that you were also able to analyze them to a place where they really made you understand yourself better?
 You do feel uncertain about your understanding of it, I mean it might be wrong, it might be all cock-eyed, but that isn't the way it seems.
 And I gather that, by that analogy, that although you may, uh, shoot off in various directions trying to see the meaning of things  when it hits, it clicks and you knew by the results that it's different than the one shooting off into space.
 Although you can be proven wrong, at least you feel pretty consistently sure of more of your thinking.
    You no longer feel you are degrading your hands.
 It shows even to the people who know nothing about the fact that you were trying to tackle your situation. They do see a change.
    Both from your own feeling and outside testimony you feel you've come a long way.
  Casting a professional eye?
  So it's really made a lot of difference in her, your own attitudes.
  One of the things that interests me is that some of the problems you don't even tackle here, and that's what I'm concerned with, some of the problems with regard to her you talked about first, but have worked on that by yourself.
 I don t know, is this your last time or not?
 I'll see you if you call.
 I just won't say.
 OK.
 All right.
 The main thing has been your inner feeling about it.
  They are really gone.
  Mhm. The house brought out a lot of those attitudes.
  Sort of a finality in the step that bowled you over.
  As I get that, the place that is distant or that you're not approaching is the one that looks good.
 As long as it's story book, that's fine, when it gets to be close to real life, that's—
  He thinks this is poppycock.
  She has a body you'd like, and you have a face she'd like.
  Your dislike for the south was a dislike for this competition.
  Now, you can say it.
 You felt partly that competitiveness, and partly the feeling if you said what you thought it would hurt her.
  You see yourself becoming a little phony or fake.
 You felt that your own standards might gradually disintegrate.
 You wonder why do you feel so sure that they would just fall away if you were in another situation.
 It ties in with the feeling you had then that you were just gradually slipping little by little-
 Mhm.  And this sort of appears like another type of prostitution of standards.
  You hate that phony hypocritical attitude, and also feel sure that you'd be the same way if you were exposed long enough.
  You feel that in some respects you do have standards you do live by, even when it costs something.
  You feel it's really tough to leave that group that you've been so close to.
 You add a kind of plus to the situation.
  In other words you are just living on past capital and—
  You'll have to start without any handicap, or the reverse of a handicap, any special advantage.
  Mhm. You feel that instead of a group that not only appreciates you but perhaps appreciates you more than you currently deserve,  you would be in a situation where you wouldn't have that group and your only, your best friend there would be someone who took quite a different attitude.
  It has made it easier to look squarely at things.
  You really feel that you are facing an awfully tough challenge to be away from all the elements that have supported you.
    You feel you might kind of hit rock bottom facing the future situation that's tough at best.
    You feel that you are pulling up these roots or cutting them off and not sure that people have roots down there.
   For the most part it wasn't bad, but—
 You can either take her or leave her without it having tremendous significance to you.
   She has the answers before the questions are asked, is that it?
   You'd see someone else's creation and let it torture you.
   You feel much more pleased with that.
 You might seem externally very much the same and yet somehow there's a different internal type of reaction  to the experience.
  That is, it's a spat and not a continuing feeling.
  You feel that there is much assurance about your own attractiveness when you are away from your home situation—
  When you get away from home, you are fair game again and there is a different feeling about it.
   Just kind of a cleaner upper visit, huh?
  It may be rugged, but you'll have to face it.
  Really it is very interesting to me because, uh, quite frankly it's from just this kind of thing and from every new person that comes in that we keep learning more and more about people and about what happens and so on. It's trying to look at the thing open mindedly. In many respects we feel that we've stumbled onto something that certainly has some potency to it.  Whatever else you may want to say about it, it has some potency to it.  And to learn more about it is very interesting and the only place where we can learn more about it is from inside of people who have experienced it.
  If at some later time you have any—it will be an interesting opportunity for comparison since you have known her well and know yourself well, if at any future time you have any evaluation of that comparison yourself well— I'd be very much interested to get it.
   If I get that, you feel she will really come out with a new personality, where yours is your own personality simply better able to function.
   And whether it will be a new personality,
   The only real measure is what is felt inside.
  One question I was going to ask you  Would you mind if I made, with editing out of anything that identified, made use for teaching purposes of some of the material in your interviews.
  I appreciate that very much. One other thing too, and that is hypothetical but, if the question ever arose, would you object to publication of that kind of thing.
  Well, don't let it disturb you either way.
   One of the things, that, quite aside from you as a person that makes you interesting, is, uh, you have at various times talked more than most people do about how the process seemed inside of you.  Often the same kind of things goes on in another person, you realize a lot must be felt inside  but when they don't say so, it's all inferred  The fact that you, uh, oh a number of times talked about how the whole thing seemed to you as you were going through  makes it very, very interesting.
 Yes, that kind of thing, of which there was more than you might realize, I mean just little comments which would be very helpful.
   At least you’re up for a little while, hmm?
  It seemed too short.
 You have a new hairdo?
 And I guess that was why she hadn’t liked you initially.
 Um, because she felt before you always had kind of a snotty answer.  But now you found that really you could make friends even with those that you were pretty sure were against you, hum?   Umm.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.   But, really if you’re kind of thoughtful about, ah, what you say and what it might sound like to them and so on, and if you’re kind of careful about what you do, why it doesn’t seem so hard to get along with them, as you thought.
 Sounds like you’ve been kinda working on that.
 Uhm, uhm, I know you weren’t going all out to try to make a good impression or something, but you really just, talk to them more and...
  So, I bet that makes you feel kinda good.
 Uhm, hmm, uhm, hmm.   You look glad that you can make good with the group.   You feel pretty good inside.
 You’re going to the formal.
 Is it...a dress from home or...?
 So you got up your nerve and asked him  and he said yes.   And makes you feel good too, hmm?
 No.
 “Sleep it off...” what?
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. That’s really kinda perplexing. I guess, uh, I’m saying it seems as though these voices, this, the voice is speaking right to you   and, uh, and sort of advising you to take it easy and sleep it off when things are building up.  And was it the voice that said, “If you are feeling desperate...”
  Oh, the voice sounded kinda desperate.   I see... Uhm, hmm, as though the voice was somehow kinda worried, or...”for gosh sakes if you feel things building up, go sleep it off.”    And, um, what puzzles you is, why would you, you heard the voice saying that when you were feeling so good and then the other thing, if I get it right, was, it seems as though some of the other girls heard a voice too.  I’m not  quite sure if they thought they heard the same voice.
  Um, so that was a real voice, or that they...
  You don’t think so.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
  You really don’t quite know whether you, ah, heard this voice - just could’ve been reading too many spooky things or whether it has some other meaning.
   I guess another puzzling thing about it is that you feel that you hadn’t heard the voice for quite a while, why, why would it return?
  No, I don’t think so.      You need another match.    I’m still kinda puzzling over why the voice sounded sort of desperate. Do you know?
 I guess you’re saying, now you’re not so sure whether you believe in ghosts or not.
   Do you mind sharing?
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  But even the same words that she used this time just showed how different the feeling was between you two. You started it up the same way, an...
    I guess I’m interested too, that I guess you’re saying,  “And I was making a wise crack too, but this time it was all right.”    
 Well, I don’t know.   Another way to phrase that.  I think that you were thinking of the fact that some of the things that you’d said that you thought would be funny, that people would laugh at.  It doesn’t seem funny to them at all.  This time you said something funny and it seemed funny to them.
 Uhm, hmm, uhm, hmm.    You wanted to get to know her and, by gosh, you did.
 You really built up a relationship there where you can talk and talk.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.   But, you were just singing ‘cause you felt good.   But, he thought probably you had an eye on him.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  You sorta felt misunderstood or something.   Uhm, hmm.  
 But right now, you have no way of getting in touch with her at all.    But you feel that she might come up and...
 Hmm.  Or at least, uh, you feel you might be home for the weekend or I suppose your grandmother or somebody could or would get her address.  Uhm, hmm.  Would your mother know why you are interested in getting in touch with her?      You don’t wish to tell her that.
 You didn’t volunteer the information.
 Uhm, hmm.  But, you think it’s hard to know whether you really would if, ah, you told your mother what your hopes were and that.    Perhaps, rather keep that to yourself for a while.
  I see our time’s up, for this moment.  Um, I left word with the desk that if you should want to phone me...I thought about it afterward I just left my office phone. I think I’ll leave my home phone too, so in the evening you can probably get a message to me. In case you should ever want to.
 I’m not concerned about that. I guess my feeling is, if, ah, you should feel that things were building up in you I’d be very glad to have you call, and I’ll decide whether it’s too much bother.  As I told you last time, if I can’t come, then I can’t come for a while. But if I can, I want to.    OK.  Oh, um, say Friday.  I’ll make it 9:00 instead of 10:00,    instead of 10:00.
  Can you tell me anything about it?
  Not much, huh?     Something amusing that’s occurring to you?
 Uhm, hmm.    That kind of reminds you of those days when they asked, “What’s new,” huh?
   Do you want to share it with me?
 Um, what, what kind of remarks?
 There was something that was sort of upsetting to you in the way they talked about it?
   If I get it right, it wasn’t the movie that was upsetting.  You kinda liked the movie.  You thought that was pretty good.  It was the way people talked about it.
   They were critical of it, or were they kind of dirty remarks, or what sort of thing was upsetting?
  Uhm, hmm.   It’s kind of upsetting to you when you hear people talk dirty.
   Can you tell me any more about that or why
 Uhm,hmm.  Uhm,hmm.     Kinda hard to know why it didn’t seem good, because, I guess, usually you like it.   But you felt as though they were being critical of the square dancing or critical of you or both?
   Of you.   And how did that?  They really were...
 They think you need some help, and you’re trying to do what they wish.
 Well, now I’ll tell you, Frank, I really haven’t had much luck helping students with problems that the dean thinks they have.  I don’t know whether I can be of any help to you along that line or not.  When a student is concerned about some problem that he thinks he has, then frequently we can work out something together, but otherwise, I don’t believe I get very far.  I wonder, quite aside from what the dean thinks about you, whether you feel that there is anything about your situation that is causing you concern.
 That’s something you feel a little concerned about.
 So you feel you really do procrastinate, and that you’ve been unable to do anything about it.
 You don’t feel sure what you did, but somehow – 
 You feel that you have some faults, but you’re not really bad.
 You feel that you just haven’t been able to take yourself in hand.  Well, I see our time is up.  Would you like to come in next week at the same time and see whether you can work on some of these things?
 You’ve been accused of these things, but you believe that what seems to be defiance is just intellectual interest.
 You feel it is a reason for some of your difficulties, but you also blame yourself for not doing something about it.
 You think the tests are not fair, and especially unfair to you because of your eyes.
 On the one hand you feel your eyes keep you from success, but on the other hand you dislike to take any steps about it.
 You feel mad, but you don’t do anything about it.
 You either let your roommate or the pressure of the situation make up your mind for you.
 You feel it isn’t quite safe to really let your own thoughts out.
 You feel everything has been pretty disillusioning, and that you’re pretty well walled in even when you’re out of jail.
 You feel that at least you tried to face the thing at the time it happened.
 You think you’re more of a General McClellan than a General Grant in your methods.
 You wonder whether you really are genuine.
 You’re concerned about your inability to make decisions, and the fact that it is so hard for you to be yourself, and you wonder how sincere you really are.  
 You feel you’re facing a pretty deep question that doesn’t have an easy answer.  You wonder if you could do it.
 You feel you should, but you wonder.
 You feel it is a challenge, but that doesn’t guarantee that you can meet it.
 You feel you see a few of the things you could do.
 You’re uncertain, and just a little frightened perhaps when you don’t use your mask, or try to be just what you want to be.
 Well, I see our time is up.  We can talk further next time.
 You want a clear goal, and want to drive straight toward it without a lot of monkey business.
 You feel there are some values you want, but you would also like to drift along.  
 You find that psychologists have somewhat different opinions on that.  In my experience I would say that habits change readily enough when goals change.  Just look at men going into the army.  When their goal changes to that of being a good soldier, hundreds of habits they have had for a lifetime drop away over night.  But some people do not agree with that way of thinking.  You’re evidently wondering how possible it is for a person to change.
 You find you’re pulled two ways about a lot of this.
 You’d like to know your resources, and have a clear purpose for using them.  
 Sort of hard to find things you want to talk about today.
 We have ten more minutes.  It’s plain that it isn’t easy to talk today.  I don’t mind waiting if you think there are other angles of the thing that you would like to talk out, and on the other hand you are quite free to go if you think you have run out of things you want to talk about.
  It’s a little difficult to decide whether you want to go or not.
 No, I think not.  If you wish to come in again it will have to be Friday, because I’m going to be out of town a week from today.
 You felt that you could have procrastinated, but you wanted to face the thing on the spot and you did.
 You feel you have been making some definite changes in yourself.
 You’re wondering whether you’ll change or not.
 That seems to me to be sound thinking.  You feel that your early experience really did warp you, but when you get to the point of understanding it clearly, then what you do about it, and the direction you take, is up to you.
 All that careful weighing was just a way to avoid committing yourself one way or another.
 You just decided to strike out and do the hard thing that would mean the most for your own development, and you think you can stick, but you do have a few qualms about it.
 You really can’t understand why you don’t like to reveal what you’re doing.
 It’s really hard to dig that out, isn’t it?
 Oh, I see.  
 You feel that you’re really very self-centered, and that that explains this seemingly odd attitude about what you put in your letters.
 You can see pretty clearly some of the reasons why you are so self-centered.
 You feel that maybe this aspect of it is even more important than the others.
 Well, Frank, our time’s about up.  You have been doing a lot of thinking and putting a lot of your thoughts into action, haven’t you?
 You’ve gotten things clearer, and you feel that through your recent actions you have begun to take yourself in hand.
 Well, that’s my conviction too.
 That is our way of working here, and the reason for it is the very one you give, that it works much better that way.  The program which you can work out for yourself is much better than any we might try to give you.  Now I don’t know whether you want another interview – it will be a little difficult because of the end of the term.
 That’s what I thought you would probably feel.  I wish you lots of luck on your job, and hope you can stick to it, as you want to do.
 Even in spite of the risk you’ll take a chance of telling the incident and how you felt two ways about it.
 Hmm.  That would be terrifying.
 It just seemed as though here was a lot of evidence.
 Hmm.  The thing you’d been afraid of the most suddenly was right there and  made you sick and you couldn’t sleep.  it really just terrified you.
 Very real.
 It was just a very traumatic experience where everything came together that you had feared.
 For you it really got you inside.
 You felt paralyzed, it sounds like.    It really wasn’t the fear of death; that you can accept.  But here it was neither life nor death; you were just stuck in the middle.
 You mean you sort of shut it out of mind after that?
 I see.  That became your belief that  somehow you would escape when it did happen.
 It sounds as though in England it was both a joke and very serious.    And that adds to the confusion.  And then it didn’t happen and you came back.
 Next time I’ll stay there.
 So there’s two sides.  One is the very real threat from outside, but the other question is, how am I going to deal with it within myself?  You feel I don’t want to just shut it out, I don’t want to ignore it because that still leaves you uncertain how to count your way in the world.
 I want to make sure that I’m understanding you that, anything you might do outside, like demonstrating and so on, still doesn’t get you to the deeper thing in yourself  and you really like to get to that    And if you did demonstrate it wouldn’t be for the sake of publicity, it would be for the hope of getting to that deeper aspect of you.
 It sounds as though you are asking something like:  “Can I possibly be at peace with myself even if this awful thing happens.”    Somewhere between…
 And it isn’t quite acceptance, and it isn’t quite surrender, but you would hope to find a place within yourself that you can live with, it seems like.
 What did you say?
 That’s the question that just seems unanswerable:  “What do I do when it happens?”    “How do I deal with that within myself?”
 This thinking about it stirs you up and stirs you up inside with that same fear.  
 To know, that you are not alone in that fear, the others have the same kind of fear.    
 I missed the way you say that – it’s a fear of dying in such a way, is that it?    
 You find yourself wishing, that you could get rid of the fear within yourself, and face it in some new way.      As you just sighed and let down a step a little?  
 Empty – and it looks as though you feel relaxed too.  
 You just feel, it is a reality that you live with.
 More mature, and…
 You want to be wise enough and mature enough to somehow live even with that.    
 Do you like to stop?  I think, we just have a few more minutes!
 I hear the tremor in your voice so I know you are...  
 And it's this concern about her and the fact that you really aren't  that this open relationship that has existed between you, now you feel it's kind of damaged?
 I sure wish I could give you the answer as to what you should tell her.  
 Because what you really want is an answer.
 Mhm. You feel she'll suspect that, or she'll know something is not quite right?
 And really both alternatives concern you.  That she may think you're too good or better than you really are.
 And she may think you are worse than you are.
 I see.  It really cuts a little deeper.  If she really knew you, would she, could she accept you?
 And so it’s quite clear it isn't only her problem or the relationship with her, it's in you as well.
" ""What- What can I accept myself as doing?""  And uh  you realize that you set up sort of subterfuges, so as to make sure that you're not caught or something, you realize that you are acting from guilt, is that it?"
 And if you can't accept them in yourself, how could you possibly be comfortable in telling them to her?
 Mhm. Mhm. And yet, as you say, you do have these desires and you do have your feelings, but- but you don't feel good about them.
" Mhm. And I guess I'd like to say, ""No, I don't want to let you stew in your feelings,"" but on the other hand, I, I also feel that this is the kind of very private thing that I couldn't possibly answer for you.  But I sure as anything will try to help you work toward your own answer.  I don't know whether that makes any sense to you, but I mean it."
 Yeah, I get the disappointment  that here, a lot of these things you’d thought you'd worked through, and now the guilts and the feeling that only a part of you is acceptable to anybody else.
" That keeps coming out.    I guess I do catch the real deep puzzlement that you feel as to ""What the hell shall I do? What can I do?"""
 Or, I guess I hear it a little differently - that uh- what you want is to seem perfect, but it means it’s- a great- a matter of great importance to you to be a good mother and you want to seem to be a good mother, even if some of your actual feelings differ from that.  Is that catching it or not?
 I realize ...  you -- alright, but let me -- I’d like to understand it. You sound as though your actions were kind of outside of you. You want to approve of you, but what you do somehow won't let you approve of yourself.
" Yeah, I- I guess I hear you saying, ""If what I was doing, when I went to bed with a man, was really genuine and full of love and respect and so on, I wouldn't feel guilty in relation to Pam.  I wouldn’t uh, I, I really would be comfortable about the situation."""
 But I guess I heard you saying too, that it isn't only the children, but you don't like it as well when it isn't really ...
 And somehow, sometimes, you kind of uh, feel like blaming them for the feelings you have.  I mean, why should they cut you out from a normal sex life, huh?
 Mhm.  But you feel, really, that at times you’re acting in ways that are not in accord with your own inner standards.
 But then you were also saying, a minute ago, that you feel you can't help that uh- either.
 That's right.
" That’s a real concern. I guess uh - I am sure this will sound evasive to you, but it seems to me that perhaps the person you are not being uh fully honest with is you?   Because I was very much struck by the fact that you were saying, ""If I feel all right about what I have done, whether it's going to bed with a man or what, if I really feel all right about it, then I do not have any concern about what I would tell Pam or my relationship with her.""  "
 What you'd like to do is to feel more accepting toward yourself when you do things that you feel are wrong.  Is that right?
  It sounds like a tough assignment.
" It sounds like a triangle to me, isn't it? You feel that I, or therapists in general, or other people say, ""It is all right, it is all right, it’s natural enough, go ahead."" Um, and I guess you feel your body sort of lines up on that side of the picture.   But something in you says, ""But I don't like it that way, not unless it’s really right."""
 Mhm. You feel this is the conflict and it's just insoluble, and therefore it is hopeless, and here you look to me and I don't seem to give you any help and that uh-
 One thing I might ask, what is it you wish I would say to you?
 So you know, yeah - You know very well what you'd like to do in the relationship.  You would like to be yourself and you'd like to have her know that you're not perfect and do things that maybe even she wouldn't approve of, and that you disapprove of to some degree yourself, but that uh- somehow she would love you and accept you as an imperfect person.
 You don't sound so uncertain.
 What I mean is you have been sitting there telling me just what you would like to do in that relationship with Pam.
   It’s, I guess one thing that I feel very keenly is that it's an awful risky thing to live.     You'd be taking a chance on your relationship with her and taking a chance on letting her know who you are, really.
 Mhm. Mhm. If her love and acceptance of you is based on a false picture of you, what the hell is the good of that?  Is that- is that what you are saying?
" Mhm. I guess that's what I meant when I said, ""Life is risky.""  It’s uh- to take the responsibility for being the person you would like to be with her is a hell of a responsibility."
 A very frightening one.
 Yeah. You sort of feel, “I want them to have just as nice a picture of me as they have of their dad,  and if his is a little phony, then maybe mine will have to be too.”  I think that's putting it a little too strongly, but-
 Sounds like you really find it quite hard to believe that they would really love you if they knew you?
 I see.
" And now you are kind of in a no-man's-land of probably shifting from one point of view toward them to another, but boy you'd sure like somebody to say, ""That's right, you go ahead and do it.""  "
 It is so damned hard to really choose something on your own, isn't it?
" So that you kind of reproach yourself for that,  I guess. And feel, ""Why, if I was anybody, or if I was grown up, I'd be mature enough to decide things like this for myself."""
 I guess, judging from your tone of voice, you sound as though you hate yourself more when you lie than you do in terms of things you disapprove of in behavior.
 The point is, you haven't forgotten.
 I guess the way I sense it is uh, you've been telling me that you know what you want to do and yes, I do believe in backing up people in what they want to do.  It’s just a little different slant than the way it seems to you.
 You see, one thing that concerns me is uh,.. It's no damn good you’re doing something that you haven't really chosen to do.  That’s why I am trying to help you find out what your own inner choices are.
 And I am interested that you say - I'm not just sure which words you used - but you don’t want- you don’t like yourself or don't approve of it when you do something against yourself.  
 It sounds like you’re feeling a contradiction in yourself too, although you- what I heard you saying in part is uh, the way you like it is when you feel really comfortable about what you are doing.
 I see.  Because in the moment, it may seem like your true feelings.
 Mhm. Mhm. So that really is tough ah ...  When if you feel comfortable in the moment about it, but then afterwards don't feel at all comfortable, which course of action was really the one you should have followed?
 Although you are saying – uh, I expect it is – but, but you’re saying too that you know perfectly well the feeling within yourself that occurs when you are really doing something that's right for you.
" Mhm. You can really listen to yourself sometimes and realize, ""Oh no, this isn't the right feeling.  This isn't – this isn’t the way I would feel if I was doing what I really wanted to do."""
 I, I sense that in those utopian moments, you really feel kind of whole.  You feel all in one piece.
 I expect none of us get it as often as we'd like, but I really do understand it.      Mhm, that really does touch you, doesn't it?
 You look to me like a pretty nice daughter.    But you really do miss the fact that you- you couldn't be open with your own dad.
 You were just trying like hell to be the girl he wanted you to be.
 That's right.  Sure. 
" So you slap at him and say, ""This is what I am, now see."""
 Oh, I see. You really feel badly that you think there is very little chance he will say that.
 That was…  He’s never really known you and loved you and this, somehow, is what brings the tears inside.
 Mhm. Mhm. It is much eas… It’s much easier to uh be a little flip, because then you don't feel that big lump inside of hurt.
" Mhm. You feel “nope” that, ""I am permanently cheated."""
 I don't feel that's pretending.
 No, I meant about the real close business.
 Well, all I can do is what I am feeling-  that is I feel close to you in this moment.
 Do you feel as though that's a big need, that it would take a lot of caring and a lot of understanding to fill it up?
 One of the things you really deeply want is to find a father whom you would love and respect and who would really like you as you are, and not to just like perfection.
 The phrase that comes to my mind - I don't know if it is appropriate or not - you're slapping your father in the face, aren't you?
 No.  By going out with those who are quite unlike the ones you'd really want.
 You feel its all kind of complex.
 Earlier you had good reason to believe that you were top of the list but at N____ and even more so here, you felt that you didn't quite measure up.
 There was a good deal of doubt about that, and you don't know quite what to do in regard to that.
 I'm sorry, I didn't get that.
 You can’t quite tell whether you're kidding or not.
 You feel that in a sense, this is like taking a pill for the situation back home, but now that the effect of this is wearing off, you're in a worse spot than you were at home.
 All bottled up in regard to it.
 You're finding that these emotional problems just rise up to defeat you in all kinds of things.
 Most things that you did from a sense of duty, you felt rather disillusioned in those activities. At the same time you came really you wanted to and now you find some of your old ways of doing things ....
 …creep up on you. And this hasn't been really satisfying either.
 If you could change some, why, this could be a profitable experience.
  You say you find yourself working for grades, which is something you don’t really want to do, but you feel driven so do it.
 Can't deceive yourself that easily.
 Just a whole mess of things you feel that are blocking you up right now.
 You feel that sometimes even a nervous breakdown might do some good.
 If you could only comfortably break down, that would at least be a way out of some of this.
 You think that's one of the things that got started long ago, and you just don't feel sure that your ready to go into marriage.
 You think it would hardly be right to impose so much mixed-upness on anybody,
 You don't feel that he could quite understand the sort of thing you're going through.
 Sort of even helps to share it somewhat when you feel that somebody else knows a little bit about it.
 Then you really wanted to pour out and have somebody understand they would immediately start to pour back something to you.
  Um-hm.
  You feel that you really mulled this over a lot with other people.
 You feel that, to her, it seems like concentrating on yourself.
 You mean, you try to put yourself into other situations.
 And till you're more straightened out, you feel that that just doesn't work.
 Just running away from the problems within yourself.
  You feel that in some ways you’d like to just cut loose from everything in your situation, except perhaps your mother.
 You feel a little bit like cutting loose but you feel as though really the wiser thing is the more conserving.
 So that in a' sense your own confusion keeps you from being judgmental towards others, but still your confusion shows through too then you try to help others. Is that right?
 You feel that you really like to achieve and learn a lot, but you just, you're just not doing it at present.
 M-hm.
 You feel that you do have the ability and if you could channel it in some way that would be integrated or united, why, you really would get somewhere with yourself.
 On the surface it would look as though, why simple enough, do all those things that you mentioned. But inside yourself there's a lot more somehow that, well, stands in the way of that.
  Just felt that there was a need to get away and you couldn't explain it to others, you just couldn't.
 Can’t learn 'cause you're all mixed up…
 You feel you tried that to some extent and know its limitations and you also know the limitations of just book learning.
  Out of your unhappiness.
 Both the teacher and L____ feel that if you think a lot about this, why, you just destroy your happiness.
 You’re not quite sure yourself whether to try and analyze and think about yourself or not.
 You really feel under a lot of pressure at the present time to find some kind of answer for yourself on the whole business.
 Although there isn't much spoken pressure in the family, you feel there is probably some.
  M-hm.
 You feel you’ve tried so hard to live up to a lot of  these standards that others have talked about and so on, that you’re really not quite sure where you live.
  You wonder if it could seem as bad to anybody else as it does to you?
 You feel that it's an awful feeling to have, and still you have it.
 An outsider looking on your situation would think, why you’re perfectly happy.
 You feel you have everything that it takes to make happiness, except the happiness.
  You don’t care what…
 You'd go to any length to get just that thing that you lack.
 Wouldn't only help you, would help a lot of other people too.
 Really make yourself worthwhile to society.
 If  you could find a clear-cut purpose that you wanted to stand by, it would help all around.
 You think it's really bad that you have to try to discover that sort of thing now.
 You really want to find an answer that is satisfying to you.
 You feel that it might be that your own aims are higher than your ability.
  M-hm.
 You just don't find it easy or satisfactory to have a resigned attitude that would accept a lower aim, because you do feel a conviction that you have potentiality.
 You feel that if you keep on as you're going, you will burn yourself out.
 Well, I think I think the kind of thing you are doing, that is, I think if we can explore this enough, the kind of thing you're doing right here, that if we can explore it deeply enough, I think we'll find the answers. I don't pretend to know them now; you don't know them now; but I think we can find them.
  I don't figure on going yet I’ve got until at least twenty minutes of. Unless you don't particularly, if you feel that you've said what you can say today, that's, all right, if you'd like to leave, you can.
 You feel there's so many things it’s hard to bring them all in.
  Not sure what to talk about.
  You don’t like to blame your school or your family, but still you feel that to some extent your family was responsible.
  It was what, you say?
  They were so good and so thoughtful about the situation….
  That it sort of made you feel that you couldn’t possibly let them down.
  You feel you’d really like to do something that’s definitely needed.
  You've tried to find ways of using yourself, religion being one of those, but not too -
 Even that hasn't quite done what you --
 Wanted or needed.
 You realize that wherever you went you would go along.
 You, want to somehow try to face your life squarely and get straightened away at it rather than just making the best of a bad proposition or breaking down.
 You feel that really you are losing some of the richness that life might have for you.
 It's that you're not quite getting, that you want very much.
 You could so some things as you are, but could be a lot more effective and satisfied if you could get straightened out inside.
 You'd be willing to do anything that gave you promise of really helping along that line.
 Well, I expect we should perhaps cut it a little bit short today, because I do have to get over there now. Probably you'd like to come back soon, is that right?
 I think maybe I can see you Wednesday at one o'clock; I know I can see you a week from today, but I'm trying to figure out whether I can see you in between now and a week from today. Wednesday at one, could you?
  Well what’s new today?
  Every experience, you feel, to be worthwhile must be worthwhile in terms of the future.
  M-hm.
  You feel that the exam question is just another instance of this business of looking toward the future.
 Feel kind of puzzled because you feel undoubtedly you could pass the exam.
  But it’s a question of what it symbolizes to you.
  You feel you have some lessons both as to a cautious kind of approach, and also some of the fallacies in it in your father’s experience.
  You feel that one really ought not to put too much emphasis on the future.
  And some real emphasis on the present.
  You feel a real desire to try to learn some of this for what you would like to learn from it, not in terms of meeting some future examination demand or any other future demand.
  You sort of feel, in the back of your thinking, you can’t help… can’t really be free from in making that sort of decision, because you feel it kind of hangs over you this feeling that you want this credit.
  Fearful of doing something you might regret.
  You’ve always played it safe.
  You really would like to...
 You’ve always played it safe and you've never had to regret it.
 So that if I understand that, you say you've never had any reason for specific regret, but you do have an over-all one.
 You regret that somehow you’ve missed some living through your cautious approach.
 For you to depart from that pattern in any way would really be a very difficult thing.
  M-hm.
  That is, you might try to decide the issue just by destroying things like that, and then you…
 But you're held back, too, thinking, after all, someday you might really want those things or make use of them.
 That uncertainty makes it even harder for you to make any definite decisions.
  You think perhaps you could find some way of forcing yourself to do what you feel you would like to do and also feel you can't, I take it.
 You feel that somehow you might be able to club yourself into something.
 You feel that to take yourself so seriously is to some degree a type of conceit.
 You feel that your present reaction may be due to that, some of those feelings of inadequacy.....built up around those situations. Even though, I take it, you feel that contradictory with what you are.
 So maybe they're not really contradictory.
" You feel, really, that you’d like me to  try to say something. And I suppose that the one thing that I could say I don't even know that you'll believe. That is, that I’m trying to understand how this whole situation feels to you because I think as you explore your way through it, that as I understand what it is you re exploring through, then we could arrive. But when you ask ''what should I do?"" I suppose you're asking about exams, primarily, or at least partially, is that part of it?"
" And if I should say, 'Take them""?"
 And if I say “Don’t take them?”  Unless what I say really fits in with what you really want to do, and that’s what you're trying to discover, it would just be so much poppycock.
 You mean you would quite willingly entrust your decision - to someone else.
 That seems to be the crux of it. It all seems to be very even.
 You feel you and Hannibal and the donkey have …
  M-hm. You don’t want to starve and you don’t want to cross the Alps.
 So that you feel that in the past almost all your learning has been almost as external to you as if it was just out here on the page. . And what you really would like would be to learn something inside. I mean, have a grasp of the meanings and significance of what you’re thinking about, not in terms of examinations but in terms of you and applying it. And I take it you feel that the only way that would possibly come about would be for you to punish yourself severely enough to make yourself learn that lesson.
 In other words, it seems a little foolish to put a rope so that you can trip over it.
 You feel, quite sure you know what I think about it.
 You feel that it's possible you might be able to take them, but to take them in a new way which would actually serve some other values that you ....
 You don't really trust your own ability to do that.
 You realized that he was doing the same kind of thing that you've done all along.
 You guess it would be simpler to ditch the whole situation entirely, and you realize that it would be plenty tough to try to break your habit of work.
 You really prefer to face things.
 So again, in a sense, that would have been an easy way out, but wouldn’t have involved facing the real issue.
 So, you've really got an answer that suits you a little.
 You feel that you have an answer in a sense, but you're not at all sure whether it will really work, and whether you can get what you want out of it.
  You’re not sure what would be the effective method.
 You realize there could be some satisfaction in doing something different from what you might be told.
 You feel a little puzzled that I don't try to throw the scales one way or the other.
 You feel as though you're sort of stumped.
  Might be a kind of desire to shift the load to somebody else, eh?
 I don't believe I got that.
 That is, you have been fairly independent in your thinking and feel it couldn't be that you wanted somebody else to take the responsibility.
 Cram and get grades or run away from the whole thing and feel badly about it -- what to choose.
 You feel that you might conceivably take the exam simply as a common-sense precaution for the future, without making it the all-important thing that it has been in the past. But, you're also, I take it, not quite sure that you can..
  Until your own purpose is fairly clear, why, it really isn't possible to get work done.
 M-hm.
   In twenty-five words or less, I'm afraid our time is about up. I'm wondering whether I could see you here at 9:15 Saturday. Would that be possible?
 You feel as though you're really shutting somebody else out.  M-hm.
 So that you really feel at the moment that perhaps you should pull out and let some of the constructive things about yourself out before they just slip away, way back.
 Don't know which is the slipping.
 You feel the decision you make will involve not only school, but a lot of things.
 You've been trying out some of that sort of thing, but aren't at all sure that it will really work.
 You're really pulled both ways on that. You think to make a change you ought to change right now; on the other hand you think that maybe it'd have been simpler to delay and change next quarter.
 You feel that if somebody could direct you so that your energies could be channeled in one direction, it’d be a real help. You wish I, or somebody could settle that kind of issue for you.
 It's pretty deeply annoying to get into the conflicts and then not be sure which way to go and wish like hell somebody would  give a little push.
 You feel you've just worked awfully hard on the superstructure.
 But nobody ever built the foundation.
 You really question whether you are still young enough to start fresh.
 Just feel you haven't got the strength to do that kind of thing.
 You feel that it's a splendid thing in general; as for you, you feel you not only aren't ready, but that if you had a family you just would have nothing to contribute to them.
 The exam issue ties in with a whole lot of things that go further.
 If I get that, if you could see your way clear to a way of starting on all this it would be a big help.
" I realize that you feel that you'd like nothing better, and the reason I suppose that I deeply can't is that you yourself just described the various aspects of it. In other words, if it were only a question of what to do about the exams, I could tell you, or somebody could tell you what to do, but you realize yourself what you do about those exams has to do with your marriage and other things; and for me to say, ""Why surely, I can tell you what to do about your marriage and your life from now on,” .... I couldn't. Nobody could - except you."
 Ye-e-e-s. Uh, I feel that the exploration that you're doing is highly constructive. In other words, the fact that you realize that what you do about this situation is going to have something very genuinely to do with whether or not you get married, whether or not you have children, what attitude you take toward the whole business - all that’s constructive.
 Somehow you've got to find some kind of light on what to do.
 M-hm. You feel that somehow you've got to find a way to begin or a way of choice in this whole business.  I suppose that all I can say is that the process that will, that has the greatest chance of leading to that light is simply the kind of tough thing you're trying to do with yourself right now.
  You feel that the kind of process that you're doing right now is exactly what you've been doing in the past.
  Well, on that I can only say that most people find that there is a very real difference between stewing around on it by yourself, and doing the kind of thing that we're doing here But I can understand your doubt and your feeling that this is probably hopeless too I take it that the way you feel about it.
 It's just a terrible inward struggle.
 Just really incapable of deciding what time to have lunch.
 Even now you feel you'd like to just make a decision - bang! once in awhile; you just can't because of the caution...  .... that you've acted on for so long.
 Whether it's a little decision like lunch or a big decision like marriage, it's all part of the same thing.
 Not sure just what you mean by that. If you can decide about lunch you can decide about marriage, is that it?
 Maybe so.
 Just walk out of yourself and leave yourself sitting in the chair here, you'd be delighted, wouldn't you?
 This self of yours is just something you're absolutely sick of. But you know how you can get away from it.
 In spite of all that disillusionment and discouragement, there's still a little flicker of hope that you can do something.
 Sometimes it's just a state of innocence.
 You feel that you just can't accept yourself as you are and yet this business of trying to make yourself into the fictional person is a tough spot too.
 In other words you feel that for a long time you've been doing just that, trying to make yourself into somebody that you're not.
 You want so much to be this dream person, or fictional person, partly because if you went back to being yourself, that's clear back at zero, hm?
 Just impossible to.
 That is, is it that you believe it just isn't possible to become some of those things that you want to be even though you wanted to be very deeply.  You don't see what further motivation there could be then what you have.
 The other alternative would be to lower your sights somewhat, but you'd hate just like the very devil.
 That strong desire to be way up there.
 M-hm. You feel that part of that, at least the desire to change is something which is basic, that you couldn't get away from.
 You feel that somehow if you could just let go, you’d do that.
 Just feel that somebody ought to give you an anchor.
 Feel physical relaxation might help a little.
 You've done a lot to take care of the physical side of it, but still you're torn to pieces inside.
 That is, what you might do is give up your dreams and be a… settle into a rut.  And feel that that's all that life offers. And if you do that you certainly won't like it.
 You can do the external things, but it's the internal things involved isn't it?
 Such an old struggle that you're hardly even sure of the reality of it.
" You see enough inklings of what you want in other people to make you feel, ""By golly, I want that for myself.”"
 Surely. You want something like that.
 M-hm. You feel that inner peace isn't anything you've lost; it's something you've never had.
 You don't know how one arrives at, that part.
 That is, you know that certain compromises do exist that might satisfy.
 You have until a quarter of twelve. But you can go if you wish, whatever you like.
 If anybody could answer that question, you'd like it from me.
 I think that it ties in with what you've been saying. You could do certain external things one way or the other because someone told you to or because someone told you not to. But I think you want and I want something different than that for you.
 In other words you would have some hope, even though it is in contradiction to what you have said before, that maybe something external would change the internal.
 Right now you feel that there just is nothing you feel sure of.
 That really is the one thing you do feel sure of - is that you've got to find a satisfying answer to some of it.
 You feel that you're at a pretty crucial point where you’ve stewed and stewed but non you must select some direction that you feel sure of..
" That's another thing you feel sure of.  I surely would if I thought it would be of any help or if I felt I knew, but I think that the thing I feel, and I have a hunch that you feel it too, is that the attitude with which you do it whether you do take them or whether you don't take them, is probably far more important then the physical fact of whether you, take them. And I can't tell you what attitude to have because it isn't just stubbornness on my part or … it’s that I firmly believe that the thing you're doing now will be to your help much more than if I should say, ""Take your examination,"" or 'No, don't take your examinations.'"
 I gather you think that would be a step. Possibly you could.
 So that if you took them with indifference, why you'd just be filled with regret afterwards.
 If you can't take then to perfection, why, you're not certain you want to take them. But that's really ruled out by the time factor now.
 Not even sure when you're retrograding or when you're progressing. But you do know that you're scolding yourself for not having taken your exams in the way you used to.
 It's an issue that has come to, be not merely your exams but just yourself.
 In other words, you feel there are several ways in which you might have tackled it and you reproach yourself for not having taken each one of those pathways, The main thing is you don't like the situation as it stands.
 Puts you really on the spot.
 That is, even in relation to these contacts here you - is that what you mean? you vacillate back and forth as to the importance of them.
 You feel that for you, certainly in the past at least, anything you do you, you do completely and all out and now you're trying not to in some respects, but you're not oven sure whether or not you want to ... because....
 You feel that perhaps for you the way of working is that way.
 Not quite sure what you're fighting, but you're quite sure it's in that struggle.
 You feel very much that in the past it’s been your procedure to close your eyes and go smashing ahead and now you’re struggling to see whether you can discriminate and choose really what you want to do.
 Where you have gotten places you' re pretty sure it’s been because of drive, not necessarily because of ability.
 You feel that you've tried to play down or take away the driving element and it leaves you feeling it's nothing.
 Kinda scares you ....
 So that thinking about marriage is one of the things that has made you feel that you've got to consider at least, pretty carefully this whole matter of strong drive, and on the other side you're fearful that you might lose everything in the way of drive, is that it?
 Yes. And I’m beginning to think that I have, that I'm the kind of a person who can't do anything unless there's this terrific drive and concentration and shutting everything out. When actually it's just like typing a paper; you can do an awful lot of typing-, just work, work, work, work. But you can just sit down and really think it through, and only put down your generalizations, and have a much better paper which is much clearer in your own mind, and because of the length of the typing and to schoolwork and exams, but it just seems to me to be the symbol of all this. And I think well, maybe I shouldn’t be here, you know. I should just take these books with me or go to the library and take them home because then I could apply them directly to my surroundings, rather than being all mixed up in this habit-forming, or habit-perpetuation system. I just don't know.
 The way you do a paper is, you feel, as good a symbol of the whole …
 …problem, as most anything else would be. Drive and lots of work in it and lots of concentration rather than real organized thinking or careful preparation.
  M-hm. If you ever do let down enough to simply enjoy yourself, then that has to become a spree too. That has to be overdone.
 In one way you feel that a steady influence like L_____ is what you want, and in other ways you wonder is that what you want.
 Possibly you want the way of fluctuation.
 You just wouldn't like to live without a good deal of emotional reaction.
 M-hm. You reproach yourself perhaps a little bit for possibly wasting time that might be better used.
 There, too, you think of going home and going on a reading spree, and trying to learn everything.  On the other hand, you feel that you'll be missing a great deal of richness by leaving the situation.
  M-hm.  I see. There again is another place where you're pulled very evenly in both directions.
 You feel it is, but still you're not entirely sure of that either.
 Think you're something with a bad label anyway.
 It's a difficult proposition to balance on a tightrope on every issue.
 If you could get to the point where if you knew what you wanted on one of them, you probably could work out the others.
 Can't quite figure out what deficiency put you in this spot.
" To start, did you say?  Well, I don't know whether I could be too helpful on that. I think that, as you say, when all these issues line up together it's so clear that it isn't any one of them, and I suppose, putting it into your terms, it gets back to the question, ""What do you want?” and possibly by exploring that you might begin to find some of the answers. But as I say, I don't know whether that's helpful or not."
 You feel probably some of them go through their lives without ever knowing what they want.
 It would be a pretty shallow or hollow kind of existence.
  While in one way you'd like to learn and learn everything, still you realize too that unless you could clear away some of these confusions, they would stand in the way of your learning, just as they do now.
 You feel its kind of a childish or adolescent reaction.
  So that on one hand, you don't like to think that you're childish or adolescent, and in another way you hate very much to think of really becoming mature or adult or married or responsible.
 You feel a lot of forces are just acting to make you adult and you don't want to be.
 Nobody's coercing you, but…
 But the forces are there.
  You feel discouraged and a little bit hopeless and still…
 …you can't give up the desire to tackle this.
 In other words, if I understand that, if you couldn't face the kind of thing that is involved here, why, then you just wouldn't be any good.
 You're trying to pick out of your thought in this business whether it should be moderation in your exams and a lot of other things. You're trying to pick out what's really sound in your thinking, what you can build on and you realize that it's got to touch all fields; it isn't something that hits one or two.
 You feel that's one thing you've sort of gotten hold of, even though it is still vague in many ways, you feel fairly sure you do not want simply to be fourteen other guys, no matter how ideal they might be, but to really try to be yourself.
 When you take that attitude you feel pretty ashamed or pretty dissatisfied with the material you have to work with.
 You feel that back of a lot of this might be some sort of inadequacy? Or the fact that you feel inadequate.
 You feel that the very fact that you have these kind of conflicts and so on is to some extent evidence of an inadequacy. Is that what you mean?
 So that when you get praise or rewards or what not, you do in one way feel proud and make some use of them, but underneath you feel it really wasn’t deserved is that it?
 You feel that since you're not good, you want on a compensatory basis to get a little satisfaction out of the rewards. But still you don't like that reaction either. 
  You mean you wonder what abilities you have that are good for anything.
  As soon as you start to describe the ability you think you went there again you feel not quite sure what it is. You think you want to learn.
 You’re really not quite sure what you, whether you have this kind of intelligence you admire, but you think you can't and you want, wonder whether you could ever face that fact or just do it in some way or other.
 You feel that in the areas where you're quite sure you can handle situations you haven't felt so much conflict about it.  That perhaps you emphasize areas of intelligence simply, or partly because you're not sure of them.
 Those things you know you can do, you don't quite want to do.
 You feel as though you have no backing, no confidence, when you go in in that new fashion.
 M-hm. You feel there is no intermediate landing point.
 You feel sure that you won't give yourself credit for the fact that if after all you haven't worked this new way long enough to -- for it really to be a trial.
 You feel there are a lot of rewards for just going along in the comfortable ruts, but they just aren't satisfying enough.
 I didn't get that.
 What you really want to be is free and independent, but that has to come from a person and you're not sure you are one.
 A kind of what?
 You feel you might be able somehow to gain a good deal from books along those topics, is that it?
 Your mother, you say would give you that reaction?
 She wouldn't quite understand, and you wouldn't want her to know really, all the doubts you're going through, because you feel she really has been above reproach on them.
 You just wish so very deeply, don't you, that there could be some formula that would say how to go about it.  And of course, the thing that I'm sure you realize too at times is that's just what you're trying to get away from, that you're looking for independence within yourself and so on. I think I can surely understand your feeling that you would like that kind of suggestion, and I don't know how to give something that really operates within another person; what I can do is help you work it out. I expect that's not very satisfying.
 Not quite sure whether it even is important or whether you may be wasting my time.  I think I may have said once before - anyway I'll say it now; that if at any time I think you're wasting my time, I'll say so.
 You feel this kind of a situation is so very different from a very concrete problem that some people would have.
 Feel as though you're not making progress in regard to it.
 You feel every conflict has its two poles.  And there are plenty of those.
 Everything is just evenly balanced.
 You feel completely stymied by that balancing of the scales
 Each time you start to tip the scales, why, you feel you can't do that.
 And that's where you feel you are, right at the crossroads.
 Yes. Now, let me see - next Monday we can surely find time. You want to find time in between or --
 How about next Monday at ten? Is that possible for you?
 It's spring. It really is. Well, where do we go from here?
  Well….
"  Would you have said, ""Take them""?"
  No, I'm afraid not.
 You're really glad you took them.
 No. I really believe in your ability to manage yourself. If I felt that surely you didn't want to take them, I shouldn't object.
 Really scares you that it would be all up to you.
 At least you're not sorry for having taken the exams and having made that decision.
  So it was kind of a fifty-fifty compromise between trying to cram and trying to just be fairly prepared.
  Glad you did take them even though you don’t think you did too marvelously on them.
  Sort of see how much some of these decisions you made really got down under your skin.
 That is, in regard to the flowers you felt that normally you would just turn them down because they represented a frivolous aspect, is that it?  But you tried to accept them even though it put you in considerable conflict.  and then afterwards you were glad that you had.
 You’re at the stage at the present time, that any of these new ways of behaving for you just demand absolute conscious control. I mean, you have to try to enjoy the flowers.
 You feel that somehow you’re less spontaneous than you were before.
 You feel you have a long way to go to be realistic and understanding in your relationships.  And not to just accept them because it’s the thing to do, is that the contrast I understand?
 You'd like to change the quality of your relationships.
 He felt that any slightest lapse or even seeming lapse would just ruin the family, according to his standards.
  It's that that you're trying to achieve in your relationships with people, and it’s that that you're trying to get away from - keeping all friendships, contacts with people on such a high level that it's untainted by any touch of reality perhaps.
 Afraid that if you go home you just wouldn't be able to stand by some of the things you feel you've achieved away from home.
 Feel there's been pretty great changes in you.
 You feel whether you like it or not you're going to be tested quite soon.
 Something very fearful trying to launch out in a new direction.
 You feel that your old self is someone not easily impressed.
  They're so genuinely nice that any differing with them gives you a lot of concern, makes you wonder whether you’re right.  Maybe you're wrong.
 Don't feel quite so much like trying to reform them, is that it?
 The renaissance has really been a renaissance.
 You felt that perhaps by telling him, to do what he wanted to do that would really be the road to having him do what he should but it didn't work out that way.
 I didn't quite hear …
 At any rate, you really have left the responsibility with him and you aren't responsible for the way it worked out. That's up to him.
 You feel that with something that's happened with you that makes that experience very, very meaningful to you…  you can set off similar chains of reactions in other people. But you do realize that to control others or even to know what they should do is quite literally impossible, if you take it seriously.
 You feel that you should be responsible for her in some way, or should take responsibility for straightening her out.
 In some ways you could be close to her and yet it's doubtful that she could really take as much from you.
 You feel at the present time that you have to watch yourself but what you want is to develop a new kind of spontaneity just as real as what you had before but somehow of subtler, different quality.
 You feel you somehow found a new way but you don't want that to shut you off from understanding people or being spontaneous toward them.
 It's really a pretty tough job to set out on a new course because you keep slipping back.
 You wonder whether it would seem that way to me.  First, I only see you during these interviews. I would say no, you don't seem to be slipping back, but I can understand that you might feel that way. Perhaps you do more than I realize.
 I expect that in the long run you're the only one that can really answer that.
" But you kind of wish that someone else would say either that, “Yes, you're getting somewhere,” or ""No, you're not making much progress."""
" Really basically, you feel it helps more than to have somebody just give you a lot of pats on the back and say, ""Yes, you're doing Just fine. Keep up the good work.”"
 It's hard to believe that your attitudes could change so in a week.
 You feel you want a stable attitude that isn't too subject to fluctuations.
 You feel there isn’t very much there.
 You feel you tasted something you like and that makes the slipping back just little hard to me because you understand it more.
 In other words, even though shifting to a new direction, you feel that you set up standards that are as complete and unattainable as the old standards.
 In other words, if I get that, and it sounds as though your thinking is going pretty deep there, that if you don’t have regard, some degree of respect for yourself, it’s also probably that you haven't had for others.
 At any rate, you're beginning to think into and to question an exaggerated altruism, and selfishness, is that it?  selflessness, I mean.
 M-hm. That's where… the new phase you're beginning to add, isn't it?
 Easier to see some of these things than to make it part of your own flesh and blood and living.
 A feeling that it's hard to stand out as yourself against some of the rewards and demands that society sets for you. So that when you go home that external, societal aspect might swamp you or drive you backwards.
 Terrific vice?
  And you’ll be caught between the two jaws, huh?
 You feel at present you must have a nice finished product to present to them and actually you feel you prefer not to have to do that.
 You begin to see that it does make some difference even though you were skeptical about it.
 You feel it isn’t so much skepticism at the outset as it is real desire to get out of the hard way.
 M-hm. You feel as though you've gone about a couple of inches out of a mile of years to go.
 You really don't feel that you can trust this new self too far as it may get lost along the road somewhere.
 M-hm. You might just slip into the old groove without intending to.
 You tried to jolt him and got jolted yourself. 
 M-hm. Just for you. Surprising the way they do things for individuals these days. 
 At any rate you feel that one aspect of things is postponed a little.
 You realize that time shouldn't be too large a factor in a decision of that sort.
 Met him when?
 You feel ever since then you've been trying to get even with him.
 You feel that your whole relationship was good back in the situation in which you were in your family and he in his and how much the situation would change here you just don’t know.
 They’d think that you were just trying to be - oh different in order to be smart.
 You’d like to feel that even in that situation you could be different because you were strong and different.  But you’re afraid that you wouldn’t have that much strength.
 One way of avoiding that problem of home would just be to keep on being academic.
 You feel this time you want to learn for yourself now not…  … for the future.
 What you’d like- to get is a grasp of it inside, not just reading to learn what the author says.
 If you can feel that it’s really what you want, then you won’t be too concerned if your grades do go lower.
 You’d like to take notes on this in order to....
 You’re not quite sure whether you’ve got this inside or whether perhaps you should take notes on it.
 Many of the time you feel you don't quite measure up to what it is you would like to do.
 Thought you were going to drive yourself to make decisions.
  You felt you’d really been able to help her.
 Want to pull your chair over?
 In other words, if you lower your goals just because you think it will be good for you to do that.
  That isn't very satisfying.
 You feel you'd be happier and more comfortable if you could really accept the lower expectation and so far any of the reasons that occur to you don’t seen quite satisfying.
 If I understand that, you feel that your expectations are set high partly because of that inexhaustible hope.  The only thing you conceive that would change that would be an experience that would result in a terrific blow.
   You feel you've had enough blows.
 You feel that very rigid code of duty is awfully deep and awfully strong,
 Yet you feel too that if you could work out a suitable solution for yourself it would make it possible for you to be more helpful to your mother, is that it?
 You felt that in that phone conversation you really were your old outside self which no longer is real.
   It’s a real fear that it might all slip away from you if you get back into the old setting.
 You're wondering if that’s knocking your standards too low.   At the other end of the scale.
  You're not quite to the other extreme, then, but you’re getting close to it.
  You feel that I seem to have minimum expectations, huh?
   It's clear because you’re analyzing me.
  It's all part of your curiosity, “how have other people settled this issue?”
  You feel that if you were sure that you were solving your problems in relatively the same way that others do, then you would be more able to go ahead.
  You feel there’s a type of freedom that she would represent in which they keep hurting others with their freedom.
  You feel that with her perhaps her ostensible desire to help you through her criticisms, they’re really her way of hitting back.
  You feel it made it easier to deal with the situation because you feel you understand it more deeply.
   In other words, if you can really not be surprised and really tolerate and accept what she does, then it makes it easier to handle within you.
  You realize that you don't want this attitude of yours to be just a wishy-washy thing.
   You feel that perhaps the answer there is that you have convictions as to what you would do, but you can understand that someone else might do something very different.
   You wonder how -- what the suitable thing is, to do, in regard to judging people. Do you or don't you? That's a real puzzle.
   As I get that, you're fearful that if you saw all sides of various issues it would reduce or take away any force that might be there.
 You would want to retain that colorfulness and so on and you wouldn't want some viewpoint you have to negate that.
   What you would like is a basic thorough-going conviction that would be flexible, but would guide you without your having to weight every situation. You would feel how you should act.
   You feel you have a pretty precarious balance.
  As though it has gotten smoothed out in parts, but you're not quite sure.
   You want to work but you don’t want to feel that work is an escape.
 You feel that certainly in one sense they're not. In one sense, at least, they’re not pseudo because you really feel them.
   In other words, you feel that it’s a reality of a sort, not of one special sort.
  You feel that perhaps even the desire to get clear to the bottom of it is a maximum expectation.
 You can look at it so many ways that you just lose assurance in any way of looking at it.
  You feel maybe you've just gone around in a circle and now you're
  Made a start on it at least.
 You feel that if you can fight clear in this, you can take most anything.
 That is, there's plenty of proof that it isn't just something chronological.
  You’d like to know from my point of view, from my knowledge of others whether this is worthwhile for you.  I think it’s those last two words that make it so difficult to answer. That is, to know what has been worthwhile for you, I can't say.  Because you’re the only one that can know that. Maybe not all at once but gradually.
 You really want this process to have value for you and to get you someplace.
  That is, you’d feel badly if I invested my time and it didn’t work out satisfactorily.
  You feel that as you try to tackle one aspect of it, the problem keeps growing…
  You feel that if you really … that it ought to be true that if you do solve one aspect it ought to reach out in a solution of others.  But you don’t feel that’s true.
 You feel there’s absolutely nothing your will couldn’t accomplish, if you had the certainty that would make it able to function.
 You feel that you work at it and work at it and the spirit gets weary.
  And it’s all a waste of time.
  That’s one thing you really feel sure of within yourself, at least in part it has had value.
  Seems kind of vague and fuzzy rather than chiseled on tablets of stone.
  Think I ought to be a good stonecutter.
  You feel if there were specific tasks and specific assignments that would somehow seem desirable.
  Kept trying to use that slogan to keep yourself in line.
  Pick a slogan out of a hat, hm?
  You feel there must be some key somewhere that would get you at the heart of it.
 You feel you are opening doors and making discoveries, but you still wonder that there may not be some one door, some one discovery... ... that would be the over-all
 What's that?
 That is, all these outer things, you know they're there.  And sure, they do concern you some, but you also feel very sure that if you can find a way of handling this inner thing that seems vague and not very specific and so on; then if you  can do that the other ones won't bother you so much.
   You feel you’ve gotten to the point where you don't need to come back.
  You feel a real increase in your own strength, in handling things.
  In other words, you feel that you’ve had in mind pretty clearly some of the things that you want to do, is that it?
  From here on in, it’s just a matter of working at it really.
  Maybe if things didn’t work out, then you might want to come back.
  In other words, you feel you’re not looking for hundred percent success.
  You really have made your aim something a little more in the limits of reality.
  M-hm.  You're going to try to get through to what makes it necessary to act in that way, and try to understand that.
  Won’t be quite so emotionally tied into it.
  You’ve come to feel that if you’re doing the best you can, measuring up to standards that are real for you, then it’s all that matters to you.
  Use yourself as well as you can and after that, why be bothered.
  You feel that you can keep a reasonable equilibrium, but it wouldn’t necessarily mean sacrificing emotional reactions on your own part.
  Almost essential that you have those emotional reactions.
  You feel that this being too strongly critical of others is something that helps but isn’t quite necessary to you now.   And also that you don’t want to over-verbalize your problems to the point of creating problems.
  To yourself or others.
  All right.  You really feel you’ve taken care of the situation as far as you’re concerned and that you’re finished.  You’re ready to move along, knowing you’ll slip back, but not being very frightened about that either.
  You’ve really achieved, I take it, the assurance you need for the present.  That is, you see where you want to go and some of the things you want to try and you’d like to stop talking about them and just work on them.
  That represents the real change, doesn’t it?  It wouldn’t make any difference to you what I thought.
  At least, at any rate, you know what you think.    I think you can feel very free to talk as long as you want this morning or as short as you want.  It’s up to you certainly and whatever you’d like to do is okay with me.  There is one thing you could do for me.  If you’re back in school next fall, it’s quite possible that I might get in touch with you; see if you could come in and chat with me, because I would be interested in knowing what it all looks like several months later.
 Goodbye.
 But … uh, very reasonable to ask that people be quiet and I think that in a little while, I know I will forget the other people  and I hope that that will be true for you, too.
 It’s, it’s difficult.
 Things have been churning in you. 
 Sort of crushed?
  Raw.  Mhm, mhm-hm.  Mhm. Little bit twisted.  
 Curtain.
  All right.
 Mhm.  That’s really hard to take. The fact that she has not spoken to you, spoken with you for three years.
 Mhm-hm.  And you’re aware that it’s a continuing pain and, [Baby chatters] and you wish it could, wish I could help you or that we could work on it together. Mhm-hm.
 Magnified.
 In what?
 It really, it really hit you. Mhm-hm.
 Because it was so similar to the experience with your daughter, uh, that, uh, you felt the same kind of, uh, pain. And I also get the sense of, of failure, being really rejected as not, not competent, not, uh. . .
 That, that you felt as a teacher you were  not  competent, you were a failure.
 Anxiety. Mhm-hm.
 Mhm-hm. So you feel you’re getting a little help now, but it sounds as though running through this whole thing is the feeling that, uh, “I’m not good at working with children. I’m not good at, at dealing with my daughter.”  And, and that seems to be the connection between the two.
  If you, if you could be sure and, and secure within yourself in dealing with your daughter then probably you could work with other children, too.
 So he really, you feel he really disapproves of a lot of the things that you do and is not, and you, neither of you are happy with each other, is that, is that right?
 You’re not, you’re not happy with your husband and he’s not happy with you?  Mhm-hm.  And you feel that has some connection with your daughter’s shutting herself off from you.
 She doesn’t really . . .
 She doesn’t really respect you.
 You tried to help her or tried to help you?
  Help yourself, okay.
 So you feel you really tried to, to become different yourself.
  You didn’t like to be a typical housewife.   [some audience laughter]
 I get that very clearly.  A strong sense of duty on one hand, you should be doing this, you should be doing that.  [then speaking louder] “No, I want to live.”
 You’re in two parts.
  You’re trying to go in two directions at once. Mhm. 
 As though, as though you’re sort of split.    One part of you wants to go in one direction and one part wants to go in the other direction.
 You want to . . .
 You, you want both of those directions.  You want both of those directions.  
 Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. You’d like. . . so the question you’re asking yourself is, “How can I heal that split in myself.”
 Almost, almost ready to just  throw   overboard that whole old-fashioned stereotype.
 Mhm.  I see.    Of yourself.
 Cautious. Mhm-hm.
 You just feel all  closed in.
 That the dream tells you it’s still  churning away. 
 A worm?
 And eating your insides.
  Aah. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. You don’t get any disapproving looks from the dog.
 The dog loves you and cares for you,   feels positive towards you, thinks you’re a nice person.    Thinks you’re, thinks you’re a very nice person.
 And that’s something you need in your life.
 When they get the long  faces that’s hard to take.
 Reproach. Mhm-hm. 
 So you ask yourself, “Am I making a mistake to. . . Am I making a mistake to, to do that work?”
 Mhm-hm. That really touches you that for many years you’ve wished that you could live a happy life, a life that you like.
 The other part says, “It’s your fate. You must do it.”
 Divorced. Mhm-hm.
 Mhm. You don’t, you don’t want to desert the children, but you feel, “I have tried and tried with my husband.” And there are times when you feel, “I don’t want anymore of that.” 
 “I don’t want to stay.”   Then, then the thought of, then the story about the boy who committed suicide comes to mind and troubles you, too.
 [background microphone noise] That you just feel you have no private place of your own,  not even a drawer where you can keep your things.
 And I guess, I just sense this struggle in you as you think this way and you think that way. “Maybe I should be able to live with it.  And maybe I. . .”  But then there comes that strong need that “I deserve a little private world for myself, even if it’s just a drawer.”
 Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. You feel you’re pulled apart by your family. 
  His, his disapproval really hurts.
 Mhm-hm. It’s a real torment.  It sounds to me like a, a torment that. . . is that?
 Torment. A torture.
 Therapist. Mhm-hm.
 Mhm-hm. Mhm. So that six weeks away in which you felt your freedom were just spoiled  in a week and a half.
 “I must do something, but I don’t, I feel powerless to, to do it.”
 Eats. Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. 
 So that that struggle in you is just destroying your insides. 
 Eighteen.  Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm.
 Eighty.  I see. You feel very old.
 You must do everything just right, mhm, cautious or. . .
 Yeah,  struggle along with a big burden. You don’t want that. 
 Look, look outside.
 Mhm-hm. Think about everything you do. 
 For eighteen years you’ve lived with a choice that you felt was a mistake in the first place.
 I feel that sigh.  That feeling that, “I’ve lived with it for eighteen years.    And I’ve tried, tried to be the good Catholic. I’ve tried to be the good wife.”
 One part says, “I want to be myself.”  And the other part says, “I must be what other people want me to be and expect me to be.”
 I see. Mhm-hm.
 I sense that you live under continual disapproval and you feel in the long run that will just destroy you.
 Anxious?
 Mhm. You feel that they wouldn’t be interested then.
 Mhm-hm. They feel this is pretty dull.
 And that you’re pretty dull.
  And that I didn’t . . I didn’t quite understand. When you go in . . .
 Cry.
 Mhm-hm. You feel there’s no way out. There, no way out.
 You’ll just go to your room and cry.
 Because it’s absolutely hopeless. 
 Well, I’ll tell you one thing that I thought when you said that sometimes you felt eighty, you understand, I thought you said sometimes you felt eighteen.
  And I think perhaps there’s some truth in that.  Sometimes, one part of you does feel like eighteen.
 That’s bad. [Audience laughter]
 So sometimes you feel like eighteen. 
 And, and you like adventure.
 Not too much.  
 Yeah. Mhm-hm. And your life gets just squashed into one narrow path.
  Mhm-hm. So that’s a very rewarding aspect of your life.  If you hadn’t done some living, your son wouldn’t be able to talk with you the way he does.  Mhm. So not everything you’ve done is wrong. 
 Mhm-hm. Seem that to you? 
 Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. So you can just feel your daughter scolding you and  telling you what’s wrong.
 Home was not comfortable.  We have only a few minutes more.  
 Mhm-hm. But you do feel, “I have a right to live a life that is comfortable for me.”
 No, not only that. 
 Search. Mhm-hm.
 Mhm-hm. For happiness?
 Well, I think you’re asking, “Do I have any right to seek out life, to really,  to really live? Or must I be compressed?”
 And that, that smile is nice.  And I can’t help but say I treasure the life that’s in you. [Translation in German.] I treasure, I value the life that shines through that smile  and that is in you.
 Yes, you could cry.
 It helps you to cry and you’ve permitted yourself to cry, but you feel, “That’s no longer enough, I have to take some sort of a step. I have  to do something.”
  Mhm-hm. Do you think we can stop in a minute? 
 Okay.
  I like yours. Mhm-hm. 
 Okay.  Let’s, uh, let’s just sit quietly for a minute again and then perhaps you’d be willing to tell the group what, what you felt as we talked together.   Whenever you, whenever you feel ready, perhaps you can just tell the group how, how it seemed to you these thirty or forty minutes.
 Warmth. Mhm-hm.
 Mhm-hm. Yes.
 Mhm-hm.  You’ve been working. 
 Disappeared. 
 So that brought you anxiety. Mhm-hm.
 Is there anything more you want to say about our conversation?
 Get rid of her.
  It doesn’t matter.
 It’s all right. Therapists, yeah.
 Another style. Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm.
   I can't quite hear you.
   So those are two  main problems for you.  I don't know which you'd rather take up first, but...
   And, and ...  Can you tell me a little bit more about your, the fear that you have of aging?  That as you get older, what?
    It's enough of a fear that you really...It really sets off a panic in you.
   And, and somehow, it is fairly recent that it just seems so awful that -  only five years until you're forty.
   Forty- five, fifty.  It seems like a terrible thing.    And it all started not too long ago.
   Because you want to remain a young woman.
    And somehow, inevitably, the time is passing by.
    And you didn't have those feelings very much until perhaps a year and a half ago.    Was there anything special at that time that seemed to set it off?
    You sort of felt that if your mother died at that early age, that was a possibility for you, too. And time began to seem a lot shorter.   The time, the time ahead of you began to seem shorter.
"   Yes, I do.  I can understand that, ahh, I can easily understand  the lack of eligible men at, at your age, in Johannesburg or anywhere else, Ahh.  And I sense also that, in what you were saying a little earlier, this question of aging is tied up with the question of  ""Where am I going?  What is my purpose?  What do I wanna make of my life?"""
"    So that that remains sort of a specter. Ahh.  A part of your fear is ""Look what happened to my mother, and am I going in the same... am I following the same path...  and will I feel the same fruitlessness, perhaps?"""
    Things are just going around so fast inside of you, you don't quite know where to... where to  take hold.  I don't know whether you want to talk anymore, ah, about your relationship to your mother’s life, your fear of that, or not?
   There is a fear of commitment, and a fear of having children  And a feeling that in marriage you don't want to give up your identity.  ) You want to still be a person.  And all that seems to be a growing fear.  All those...those fears seem to keep increasing.
   So you're not a person who's, who's irresponsible or anything like that.
   You're committed to your work, you're committed to friends.  It's just that the notion of being tied into marriage...That's scary as hell.
   I wish I could, I wish I could help you get a handle on some of those things that are going around in your head.
   But, so what you're telling me is, that you do have a purpose in life, you do have something you really want to do...  to commit yourself to music, to the arts, but you feel society prevents you from doing that )  But what you would like to do is throw up everything else and just concentrate on your love of music.
   So that you feel that your abilities are slipping away from you somehow.  They're not quite as good as they used to be.
   And so that shakes your confidence in yourself.  And perhaps makes it more, even more difficult to, to move in the direction of what you really want to do.  I don't know about that, now?
"    It seems strange to you that in the last eighteen months, everything seems very, very important...every moment,  every aspect of life seems more vital and significant.  And the question seems deeper. ""What, what am I going to do?"""
"   Yes, it seems to me that they're related in your talking about them, ah,  and it seems to me that you're saying, ahh, the fear, the fears grow stronger, as time goes by, both of marriage and of children and of commitment, as well as the fear of aging...that it seems a package of fears.  And alongside that, you've been saying that ""I know what I want to commit myself to...I just can't."""
    Um hum.  Um  You get this feeling of being trapped, that's it...trapped by the year you're in, trapped by the age you are, and  fear of being trapped by marriage as well.   So life has become a frightening prospect.
   A fear of being trapped.
   And those fears that you have, they don't prevent you from functioning in the world.  And so on.    That goes on OK, but they nevertheless are fears deep inside, and the biggest fear of all is the fear of being trapped, in so many different ways.
   You've had the pick of the crop.
   You don't wanna take too many chances.  Too much risk.
    You find that in some ways your grandmother's prediction is coming true that the... best of the fruit is...
    Now you're getting down to the...
    That's right.  So that outside, and to an observer, you are in your prime and you have everything going for you.  But that's not Jan inside.  Jan inside is quite different from that.
    You can take all the time you want, because I feel I'm getting acquainted with that frightened little Jan that is inside.
   The more you're getting through to me.
   That's a part that you know very well.    You've acted it in many plays. 
    And It works!  The naughty little girl can get away with things.  And one other thing that you said.  That you're trying to help me.  I guess I hope that what we're doing here will help you.
    I guess I feel that when you're telling me things, it's not just, it's not for my benefit.  I want you to...I hope that you can get better acquainted with yourself by telling some of those things.
    So you sort of take courage from the fact she has been through the same kind of fears.  She has lived through them, she's found that life is getting better.
    Although, she still has twinges of those old fears.
"     In other words, ""Am I...""  You're asking yourself, ""Am I trying too hard to do this all by myself?  Or should I find someone who perhaps could, I could work with, or be with, or confide in, or something?"""
    I didn't quite get the first of that. You're saying...?
    Difficult to find.
     But what you would like is someone you really could trust to help you go through and grow through this difficult period.
    Feel it's a little too much for you.
     So although you function OK and all that, still this, this being trapped is something that is with you all day long, all the time.
    So you really are seeking...for somebody, the somebody you need, the somebody you want, the somebody you could trust.
     And you feel that confidence would have to come from this other person.  That they could, perhaps, give you back your confidence.
   That's right.
    That would really help!
"   One person who believes in you enough to say, ""Sure you can do it...you're OK.  You're going to get through it!""  But you can't tell that to yourself."
"   Um hum.  Your feeling is, ""I'm not progressing, I'm slipping back""."
"    ""And I can't do it, I can't change direction by myself""."
"    No.  So that pushing it to one side, or washing it away, or saying, ""No, I won't think about that"".  That doesn't help.  It really doesn't help.  Because it's still there to be faced."
   Ahh. Um hum.
   Yes, I surely do.
    I surely do.     And it's so risky, coming from the lighted spot into the darkness, into the unknown.
   Such a chance, and so frightening.
"  That's the question you keep asking yourself. ""How can I feel differently about walking into the darkness?  How can I feel differently about adding another year?"""
   But you wish so much that there was this other person, this person from outside, who would give you confidence, who would help you through this tough time.
   So that maybe this is a part of your spiritual development. Maybe there's something you're learning from this.  Maybe, maybe it will be a good thing in the long run.  But what you really would like is, is a close personal contact with someone.
   Somebody you can relate to.  And I guess that, uh, this may seem like a silly idea, but - I wish that one of those friends could be that naughty little girl.  I don't know whether that makes any sense to you or not, but, um, if that kind of sprightly, naughty little girl that lives inside could accompany you from the light into the dark...  As I say, that may not make any sense to you at all.
  Simply that, ah, maybe one of your best friends is the you that you’re...that you hide inside.  The fearful little girl, the naughty little girl, the real you that doesn't come out very much into the open.
  Has disappeared.  Uh huh, uh huh.   Then I wasn't so far wrong.  Maybe you ought to look her up! 
  I would!    I think she would be fun, and I don't think she would be so frightened.  She sounds pretty sassy! 
  Well, I don't know - I'm only eighty, but I can still be a naughty little boy. 
   So you're raising that question too. 
   Yeah, but I think that's a very significant question you're asking yourself.  If you were more, if you were a better friend of the little girl inside of you, would that make you less fearful of the risk of marriage?  I feel badly that, that she's been missing for the last eighteen months, I really do.
   We're going to have to stop in a few minutes.
    Fifteen minutes older? 
   I see  
   Yeah, I think maybe we can stop.
    Is that all right?
    I thank you for your courage in coming up here.  And now what I'd like to do, when you feel ready, would be for you to tell the group what this felt like to you.  I'll tell them what it felt like to me.  Then we'll let them in on the scene.  Let them ask questions and so on.  Is that all right?
 Okay. There may be, there may be other things that come to mind that you want to say. I’d, I’d be glad to say a few things about how it seemed to me. Uh, it’s interesting and perhaps, perhaps typical of this culture or perhaps just typical of people that, it was quite clear you hoped very much that I would give you some kind of an answer and, uh, yet as we worked together, and I felt we were working together, um… It seemed to me that gradually you realized more and more some of the answers that lay within yourself. And I don’t kid myself that this solves your problems or anything like that. But I felt we made progress. I felt there was movement, uh, from, uh, kind of a blank wall of fears to, uh, more and more specific things and the, the uh, timing of the death of your mother and all that. Um, then one thing that I suspect, uh, I don‘t know how you felt about this. I’d like, I’d like to get your reactions too.  The silences seemed very natural to me because they were, seemed to be working silences. You were, you were trying to sort out the things that were flying through your head, wondering what to bring up. And you knew better than I what was, what was relevant and that’s why I didn’t intrude on the silences. And I know you tried to pass them off as joke once in a while “Am I supposed to say something”.   But, uh, actually I felt very much with you as you were trying to do that searching and, uh, I wanted to make it easy for you if I could. But still I felt they were your silences and that I would help you work into whatever came, came next. And then one thing that meant a good deal to me because it has always meant a lot in uh therapy to me is your increasing use of metaphors. Um, particularly going from the light into the dark.  And where you even… That was kinesthetic as well as, as well as, verbal and, uh, images like the naughty little girl and so on. Um, Somehow it seems as though people work best on their problems when they are not, I don’t know when they get into a metaphorical mood, uh, and somehow begin to resolve the problem…     I felt good about our relationship. I felt that we were working. Uh, it wasn’t easy for you. I could see that. Um. It wasn’t always easy for me to understand you. But then I, I don’t mean understand your words but to understand what lay behind them. But I think I could get a much better picture and began, began to feel what life was like for you. Uh, I guess those are my comments. Do you have any others you wish to make before we ask the audience what they think? Um. The lights are brighter this morning so it’s pretty difficult to see hands or anything like that. But if you have questions, um, will you go to one of the microphones and ….
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. Frightened of me, or frightened of the situation, or both?
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. You have to make yourself come forward to meet. Mhm, mhm.
"  Mhm. It's alright to go a little ways in meeting them, but there's some point where you feel, ""No! Now we would really meet if we went any further. I prefer to run away."""
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. But the block is not in me...  But if you go too far, you'll reveal something of you. Mhm, mhm.
  They’re touching that secret part of you that you don't quite know what it is.
  Mhm., mhm.
  That you feel whatever this is, that is sort of frightening within... is a negative feeling, the pain and hurt and, possibly, anger.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. That if you ever let yourself really live in or feel those feelings, maybe you'd never find your way back to pleasantness and happiness and joy.
  Makes you wonder whether, maybe the joy would be more real if you were able to explore some of those frightening feelings.  But they are scary.
  Mhm, mhm. Resentment and hurt and everything like that. You’ve kept it pushed down for a long, long time.
  You kind of talk it all away and explain why you shouldn't really feel those feelings, as if they're not necessary. And, uh... and you shouldn't feel them in relation to the person who caused them.
  Mhm, mhm. Certainly you can't feel any blame for that person . It must be you.
  And yet, somehow, you know you do feel that resentment and hurt. And you know the person that it's directed toward.
  But it's safer to keep it in a box, and yet you know very well that you do feel it. That you're scared if you feel it then what? You never get rid of it.
  So you know it's your mother mostly and you know the feelings that were stirred up were stirred up a long, long time ago. But, how you can work through those, that you're not quite clear.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. Again, you can explain it away that there are reasons and so on and it's okay, but you've never been able to let her see the hurt and pain that is in you, and somehow that keeps you from being all of you.
  Mhm, mhm. You have to be careful of her.
  That's your daily task is to push them down, push them down, push them down and be somebody who isn't quite real.
  You see it all very clearly, but to try to get in touch with or to express those feelings of hurt and resentment, that's where you can't do it.  
  A good feeling to let out a little bit of it even though you exaggerate the situation in order to feel that resentment.   It lets out a little of the resentment from the past.
  And you're quite, quite ingenious   in finding ways of expressing bits of it.
  I don't know what that shaking of your head means, but it looks like your saying, “It isn't possible.”
  It's got to come out so carefully that it doesn't blame anybody or, anything. You can't just let it out.
   So it's quite possible that it's okay to be unreasonable and irrational even, and spill things that aren't quite right because then you might be able to make it okay afterwards once they were out.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. Mhm, rnhm. That childhood experience of being shuttled around and not really considered in the situation. Uh... as a result of it, you not being able to consider and take care of yourself.  And you must have felt very keenly the business of being, sounds like, treated as an object, just put here, put there, and not really, not really considered, not really cared about.
  Mhm, mhm. Don’t have any undue show of emotion. You've got to be polite and   proper.
  “Don't cry. Be a big girl.”
  But when the tears were dropping, it was the four year old feeling very hurt.
  And angry at them. Can you say that? Then I thought maybe not. Angry too, um-hmm. “Damn you! Why don't you consider me?”
  So don't feel those feelings, there were reasons for your mother's actions and so on.  Mhm, mhm. Mustn't feel any of those feelings.
  “Okay, you didn't hurt me.”  It's not true, but still it feels like you must be a good mother to her.
"  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. ""Why do I have to be her mother?"""
  It's scary to let yourself down into those feelings. You might not be able to get out.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. You almost feel ashamed of that, but you do feel sorry for yourself.  You realize that, “I went through a hell of a lot.”   “I really do feel pity for myself.”
  You just don't feel things like that. You should think about other people.  And there's a good lesson in sitting on your feelings.
  You learned it all too well.
  A strong lesson.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. It's not quite so frightening because you realize, “Yes, I am in touch with them and they aren't overwhelming, but they're coming out little by little.”
  You wish what? I'm sorry.
  You feel that this is a fairly safe place and that I'm a fairly safe person to explore them with.
  And you'd like to get out more of it. This other was a hurt and anger about being shuttled back and forth, and there's the suppression in the Convent and orphanage… um-hmm.  But there are others.
  There's a lot more.
  But for the moment, they don't seem quite so scary.
  Mhm, mhm. It's really good to have that fear lessened a little where  when it's really stopped you from so many things.
"  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. ""What's the big deal? What's the big crime in saying, ‘I'm hurt. I am hurting.’ Why does that seem so hard?”  Um..."
"  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. ""What's the big deal? What's the big crime in saying, ‘I'm hurt. I am hurting.’ Why does that seem so hard?”  Um..."
  Mhm. Mhm, mhm.  Trying to be someone that you were not.
  Mhm, mhm. You want to try to be what they would like and not consider you.
  Mhm, mhm. You think you'll be you for a while? Is that what you said?
  Mhm, mhm. It might be a good experiment, huh?
  Really consider yourself and be yourself and not just try to be what other people want you to be.    We're going to have to stop in a couple minutes. Is that okay?  Okay to stop now?
  Good. 
  A need to hang on so you can kind of make up for the things you feel guilty about?  Is that part of it?
 The old vacuum sort of, when she’s not there.
 It’s very hard to give up something that’s been so precious in your life, but also something that I guess has caused you pain when you mentioned guilt.
  So it may be unreasonable, but still, when she doesn’t meet your needs, it makes you mad.
  You’re also feeling a little tension at this point, I guess.
 Uhm, hmm.
 A lot of pain.    Can you say anything more about what that’s about?
 It sounds like a very double feeling there.  Part of it is, “Damn it, I want you close.”  The other part of it is, “Oh my God, what a monster I am to not let you go.”
  But instead, sometimes you feel like her daughter.
 Uhm, hmm.     But you place a lot of expectations on yourself, “I should be different.”
  You should find other ways and other sources to meet your needs.  But some-how that doesn’t seem to be happening?
 There are some things that you just want from her.
 When she pulls back, that’s a very painful experience.
    It looks like you’re feeling some of that hurt right now.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.   Pulling away from you.
  you feel her sort of slipping away, and you… and it hurts…and…
 Uhm, hmm.  You’re experiencing it right now, that she’s leaving and here you are all alone.
   Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.   If I understand right, not lonely in every respect, but lonely for her.
 I’m not a good therapist, I forgot a box of Kleenex.  But, I think I’ve got… 
 Uhm, hmm.  It feels as if the tears could just flow and flow on that score.
 That just to have her leave, have her pull away is more than you can take.
 It sounds as though that is almost the center of your life.
 And there’s a real ache in your heart with her leaving.
 “I want to keep her as my daughter, as my little girl, as the one I can cuddle.”
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
  You’d like to protect her from that life out there and all the pain that you went through…
  It’s a hard world. . .
  And you’d like to cushion it for her. . .
  Umm-hmm. . . You want to make it all right just as you might when she fell down and banged her knee or something.   You’d like to make it all right.
  Uhm-hum.  And I guess it’s very hard to face the fact that, at this time, you can’t make it better for her.
  Okay. Okay.
  But still in your own mind you can make it better for her and by god you’re going to.
  Uhm-hum. You’ll save her even if she hates it.
  Uhm-hum. Uhm-hum. Uhm-hum. It’s a question who you’re saving.
   Uhm-hum. You feel, “I wasn’t a perfect parent.”
  Mhm. And you can’t forgive yourself or you haven’t forgiven yourself for making those mistakes.
   Uhm-hum. Uhm-hum. You give yourself a very rough time.
  Uhm-hum.  Uhm-hum.  . . It occurs to me you probably wouldn’t think of treating your daughter as badly as you treat yourself.
  Uhm-hum. Uhm-hum.  .  . . . Can you see what’s going on in you?
  And that’s sad because it’s so rare?
  Uhm-hum. You feel it isn’t often that you’ve been really heard. . . . . . .
  And that just brings the tears pouring out. . . .
  She really hears you, too.
  Uhm-hum, so that’s, uhm-hum, that’s what makes the relationship so precious, she hears you. . . .
  Want a Kleenex?
  Uhm-hum. It sounds as though you don’t have too many caring people in your life.
  And to lose one of them . . .
  A big loss.
  Can you care for yourself that much?
  Uhm-hum. So the caring for yourself just seems unreasonable, you don’t deserve that.
  You’d like to care for yourself, but. . . .it really seems to be something you have not been able to achieve.
  Uhm-hum, uhm-hum, uhm-hum. . . “You’re a bad, bad person.”
  An awful person.
  “How could anybody care for a person like that?”
  Uh-huh. So she’s pulling away from you ‘cause she sees you as a bad, bad person.
  Umm-hmm.
  Maybe she knows your secret and. . .
  So she’s not going to have anything to do with this monster.
  Uhm-hmm.
  “After all, anybody would be glad to get away from such an awful person.”
  Umm-hmm.  Just no way that you can. . . accept yourself.  
  There’s some parts of you that are so awful you can’t accept them, you can’t take care of them.
  Uhm-hum. Uhm-hum. Uhm-hum.  “They’re just unforgivable.”
  Umm-hhm. Umm-hmm. So it isn’t something specific you’re talking about, it’s just a feeling. . . “I know I’ve just done awful, unforgivable things.”
  You must have.
  That’s what it feels like even though, I gather, that’s not really true in all   respects, but it’s what it feels like.
  No one wants to touch you because you must have done some awful, awful things.
  So what you feel is your world only makes sense if somehow, some time, some way you did these monstrous things, these awful things.
  That explains everything.
  Does that mean that you feel no one care, no one accepts?
  So that the person who can’t care and accept and value you is you.
  The person who sees those things are unforgivable is you.
  Umm-hmm. Nobody could be that cruel to you or make such awful judgement   or hate you so.
  Sounds like you’re the judge, the jury and the executioner.
  You pass a pretty tough sentence on yourself.
  No.
  You’re not a very good friend to yourself. Umm-hmm.
  And you wouldn’t think of doing to a friend what you do to yourself.
  Umm-hmm. Umm-hmm. Umm-hmm.  Because to you, your self is just unlovable.
  Okay. Okay.
  Okay. So in some respects you do love yourself.
  Umm-hmm.
  Umm-hmm.
  Umm-hmm.
  Umm-hmm. That’s a damned nice little girl.
  Umm-hmm.
  Uhm-hum.
  And she’s a daughter you can hold on to.
  And she’s a survivor and she’s strong and she’s been through a lot, but she’s okay.
  It must be nice to have such a special person in your life.
  Can she care for the other parts of you?
  She’s starting to.
  Umm-hmm.
  Umm-hmm. She’s not as hard on you as the adult you.
  Umm-hmm.
  Umm-hmm.
  Umm-hmm.
  Sounds like she loves you.
  Umm-hmm. Umm-hmm. Umm-hmm.  And she loves all of you.
  To her, none of it is unforgivable.
  All okay.
  I like her.
  Hmm?
  She’s going to save you.
  Umm-hmm.  She may really be able to keep you from being so hard on yourself. Really save you.
  Umm-hmm. Umm-hmm.
  She’s a good companion to have, isn’t she?
  Yeah. Umm-hmm. To have that kind of a friend inside really touches you.
  Umm-hmm.
  Umm-hmm. She’s not going to pull away and. . .
  Umm-hmm. Umm-hmm. And be a mother to mama too, huh?
  What’s that smile?
  Yours twinkle, too.   You look more peaceful.
  Uhm-hum. Uhm-hum. And it does something inside when you feel you’re really loved and appreciated.
  Uhm-hum. Uhm-hum. . . mmm.  
  Umm-hmm. Umm-hmm.
  Umm-hmm. Just soft enough to just kind of melt.
  Umm-hmm.
  At least everything’s okay right now.
  Umm-hmm. . .umm-hmm.  .  . It’s a good time to stop?
  Good.
  Thank you.
  But you just can't divide yourself -- it's all or nothing at all for you.
  Mm — mm — you don’t even want to get underway if you’re not going to carry straight through to the, finish —
  Some — something that has any of you in it — I mean if you really choose to do it or something you’re interested in, then if you get going on it like, I guess you’ve got to push it through. You just say if somebody else is making —
  Mm.
  Well, I guess, as I say, don’t think you always have to just sit, you — some of them walk around here.
  But anyway, it’s, it’s hard for you, ah, to just stay put.
  The kind of a guy that’s always on the go — huh?
  Mmm — mmm — You can’t stay put, you’ve got to keep moving, moving, moving, moving —
  Mmm — mmm.
  You really don’t quite understand why you can’t, ah, stick at one thing long or why you have to, well as you say you eventually come back to it, but you have to move around, you’ve got to be on the go [pause] and even right here it’s darn hard to just sit. Well, as I say again, I’ve already said, you can always get up and walk around whenever you want to. I don’t smoke, but if you’ve got cigarettes, why feel free to light up one.
  You can’t quite make it . . . .
  You’re trying to say, if I get the flavor of what you’re feeling, sounds as though the feeling may be — “What’s the use of anything, what’s the use of doing anything, what’s the point of talking, what’s the point, ah, of anything at all, doesn’t seem as though there is any point or purpose in anything”—is that your feeling?
  “There isn’t any meaning in things—there’s just no sense to anything.”
  You feel there’s no sense to a dream world and there’s no sense to this world –[long pause]
  You just got to get the hell out of here.
  Mmm – Boy, that was a real blow. As if it weren’t bad enough to feel that nobody wants you on the outside, then to feel they don’t want you here, just going to kind of get rid of you, that just really cuts – [long pause] You just feel, well, “They aren’t going to send me to the County –“ [long pause]
    You just feel “I would really do away with myself before I’d let that happen –“ [long pause]
  Would you repeat that again?
  Mmm – You feel there isn’t anyone that gives a damn about you – [pause] You just feel nobody wants to have anything to do with you – [long pause] Guess that must make you feel “ Boy, am I ever alone.”
  I see we just have a few more minutes left – [clears throat] – would you feel like sharing with me anything of what’s been going on –
  Hmm.
  You just feel you don’t get on with her and you don’t want to have anything to do with her –
  Mmm – I guess you’re saying –
  You were saying, “Here I am at the very bottom ebb, just really frightened, fearing I might do away with myself and then what does she do – she says she hasn’t got time enough to see me.”
  I guess you feel she doesn’t really care either –[long pause]
  “Nobody really gives a damn about me –“ [long pause] I guess it must sort of seem as though “What really is the use? – nobody cares about me at all –“ [long pause]
  Mmm ….
  I’m not quite sure what the “so” is. She has her way of thinking and you have hers.
  Yes, that’s right [laughing] – I guess I – got that mixed up, that’s what I meant – ah, she has her way of thinking and feeling and you have your way so-o-o-o –
  The thing I can’s [sic] quite decide is whether you’re saying, “So, it’s hopeless –“
  I see, you feel that there’s no such thing as — communication I guess between people who hold different views. You feel “If she feels one way and I feel and think another way then there’s no use talking to her, there’s no use, they—“ [pause]
  So you feel, yeah, you communicate what you feel, but then what she feels is “it” so now you can go— [long pause]
  You feel that, no matter what you do, every time you move any direction, somebody will slap you.
  Not everybody.
  I see, I see, I see — mmm —it’s just no matter what you try to do or try to think about or what not — Wow! Then this prospect of going to the County — will just rise up and slap you in the mug.
  You just won’t be able to get that out of your mind. It just hits you from right to left.
  You just try to do things to keep it out of your mind but in spite of anything you can do it just comes hitting back at you.
  Mmm — mmm — mmm — You just feel that it — destroys you and your confidence in yourself and everything. It just tears you, and makes you — smaller — [pause]
  Every time it comes back to you, you feel, “Well, that’s going to be my future, what else is there to look forward to —“ [pause]
  Mmm — You just feel as though “Really there’s nothing ahead of me but the County Hospital —“ [pause] I guess that’s a real —
  Mmm — “How could I possibly think anything different than that? — What other alternative could there possibly be?”
  Then, it’s either the County Hospital or running away from here, those are the only two alternatives that seem to you possible.
  I think so.
  Mmm?
  I still couldn’t hear you, your best friend?
  Yes.
  See if you can go to town Sunday, with the best friend you’ve got here.
  He can go — mmm —
  Mmm — is a dollar enough, hmmm?
  You want to take him. I see.
  Well how about two, will that do it?
  So what you’d like to do is take him in and treat him to the show, if you possibly can, huh —
  Huh?
  Mmm — well, let’s see, I’ve got three ones — you take them, if you don’t need them you can give part of it back to me, but if you do need ‘em you’ve got ‘em. [pause]
  Huh?
  You’re going all day Sunday, is that what you said? You’d just like to really get away from here a little bit with a friend, huh?
 Mmm — what boat is that?
  Mmm — mmm — no outside friends, or relatives or any of the family or anything that call on him any more than on you, so you might as well —
  So you know how he feels — mmm — you sure do, don’t you — so you might as well be friends to each other at least, hmm [pause] if he doesn’t have a family that will come to see him you can be his family and if you don’t have a family that comes to see you he —
  Hmm?
  Not that — it’s just that you know how he feels and how damn lonesome it is and you’d like to do something for him — is that more like it? [pause]
  Mmm — mmm.
  What did you say?
  Mmmm.
  Mmm — mmm.
  Mmm — you just feel that all the people whom you might have turned to for some corroboration are all out of the picture — [long pause] I guess I’d just like you to know that if you want me to speak to her on that, I would — [long pause]
  But you tried to be honest with her that as to whether you were ready to leave, you really didn’t know yourself.
  Mmm — mmm — it’s as though it sort of builds up in you as a real hope and desire and so on and then when you don’t leave why it kinda dies down again — is that it — mmm? [pause] What’s the biblical verse, “Hope deferred maketh the heart sick,” or something— [pause]
  What?
  M-hmm.
  M-hm — m-hm — if you leave you want it to mean that you really leave and ah, don’t come back and I guess it’s when that, when you think of whether you’re ready to leave in that sense then it’s, then you’re not quite sure, huh— [pause] I guess it is, you want to get away from here all right, that’s something you’re clear enough about, but it’s whether you’re really ready to leave in the sense — of never coming back, that’s — that you’re not quite so certain of— [pause]
  M-hm — m-hm — m-hm — m-hm — “I am absolutely determined that I won’t talk with her on my own initiative, and I won’t go to town — no matter how many chances I get.”
  Mmm — you feel like —
  “She won’t let me go in my way, so I won’t go in any way” — and I, I get a feeling behind that, “I’ll show her somehow, I’ll show her that —“
  That’s it, uh-huh, I wasn’t quite sure how to finish that myself. “I’ll show her that I don’t care about anything — I don’t give a damn about myself, about going to town, about her, about getting out, I don’t give a damn about anything— [long pause] Sort of well, I’ll punish her by becoming a person who doesn’t want anything [pause] and that’ll show her —“ [pause]
  I guess I hear different things in that, I, I hear you saying — I hear the words where you’re saying, “It won’t hurt me at all, I don’t care, it doesn’t, I don’t give a hoot” — and I can also hear the bitterness and the hurt in that— [long pause]
  I guess you are saying, “I care that I was hurt.”
  M-hm — m-hm — m-hm — I guess you’re saying everything, every other feeling is just covered over by the feeling, “I don’t care about anything, I don’t care, I am indifferent, I, it doesn’t make any difference what happens — nothing makes any difference to me.” . . .
  Huh.
 You feel you’ll hold out because of your pride, or will you go [pause] well, maybe I shouldn’t ask, but let me, let me see if I’ve got the situation straight. Dan would like you to come, and I imagine you’d like to see him, wouldn’t you? —
  And _______ [the doctor] was willing for you to go, but I suppose that all boils down to the question of whether you’d ride in the green car [hospital car] or not, is that it?
  Oh, really? Well that’s a change, isn’t it? — I see, I see, so that isn’t the issue, it’s more the question of “Will I step outside of this place or not,” huh? Or maybe that isn’t the issue, I should probably keep my big mouth shut and let — you tell me, what, what is the, what are the angles of it?
  Huh— [long pause] I guess one reason I kind of jumped on that was that — just a minute before that I was thinking, I wonder if you really have considered the alternatives. If you have and made up your mind, O.K. I was thinking about more general alternatives. I was thinking, I realize how deeply you’re committed to the notion, that you won’t do anything but be indifferent, until someone opens doors for you, that by God you’re not going to make any more efforts and get hurt — you’re not going to try to do things and then have them slapped down so you will sit until something happens, at least that’s the way I’ve gotten your feeling and, I can understand that certainly. All I was wondering was whether you really have considered the alternative possibility — oh, another part of that is, another part of the first one is, “And if they say I’ve got to go to school, O.K., then I’ll go to school to get out of here even though I think it’s a silly idea and don’t want to do that.” Ah, now the alternative to all of that would be a tough one, I realize, but it would be to decide “I’m going to go to town and scout around and see if I could find anything in the way of a job. I’m going to go to town and visit Dan. I’m going to go to town and make the kind of contacts I would want if I did get a job”— libraries or churches or whatever has any meaning to you—“I’m going to tell . . . .”
  Want a cigarette? [pause] I feel as though I haven’t been much help today — [long pause]
  Mmm — So you feel, on a [mumble] like that, I’m not sure I get the whole thing — you say either you want everything at the same time or you don’t want anything —
  I see, I see, uh-huh, uh-huh, well that is true, isn’t it? You want everything — you want to be out, and you want to have a job, and you want to have a girl, and you want to have all kinds of things and at the same time you feel, “I’m indifferent to everything — I don’t really want anything— [pause] If I want anything I get hurt [pause] so I don’t want anything —“ [long pause] I guess that fits lots of things, I guess that’s part of the reason why you’re saying, “So I don’t want Sally to come tomorrow, but if she comes I’ll be glad to see her, but I’m indifferent,” but I think another part of you probably says, “I hope very much she’ll come, and I want to see her —“ [long pause] Is it something like that? [pause]
  Mmm — mmm — mmm — “When I make up my mind to go to school, I want to get admitted to school, I don’t want to have this and that and the other all unfinished in regard to it.” huh — mmm, mmm — I guess it’s the — the unfinished part of it that’s particularly hard to take — if you could plow through and do whatever you’ve got to do to get into school, O.K., but to have to have this hanging in mid-air and that hanging in mid-air — that really bothers you— [long pause] I guess the feeling is, “I’m a person who likes to plow through to the finish and I don’t tolerate it well if I’m interrupted or if I can’t wind the thing up, or if I can’t — I hate to leave it with loose ends sticking out all over —“ [long pause]
  M-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm; you just remember that as one sample of this. Ah, O.K., once you started painting their house you would have liked to just paint right through the night if necessary ‘til you were finished— [long pause] I guess you hate the feeling of anything hung up in mid-air or unfinished— [pause]
  Huh?
  I remember, so I would like to advance you a loan to take care of that — you can pay me back when you get your money if you want, ah — but you, ah — I just want to make sure that, ah, if you want to have, ah, if you want to be able to work on your stuff here, you’ll be able to go in and pick up your books this afternoon, that’ll give you something to do over the weekend — I do want you to be able to come in on Tuesday [pause] and I think I realize how you feel about the thing in general, I’m not trying to say anything about that and if you feel that you want to stay away from school until they get this squared away, O.K., and I really do understand how you feel about that. It’s just on these two smaller things that I want to make sure that, ah, just the lack of bus fare that will stand in your way of either getting your books or coming to see me— [pause]
  There isn’t any bus going in now?
  Mmm — and when does the school close up?
  Until night —
  Well, I think I will be here about ah, quarter of three or three o’clock, and going in at that time, I’ll be over here then — ah, there’ll also be some other people from our group going in at about that time too, so if you wanted to you could go in then — is it open on Saturday?
  Well, I’m not trying to persuade you on that, I just felt more that the lack of a little bit of money would stand in your way of doing either one of those things.
  Huh —
  Yeah, it bothered you at first.
  Mmm, felt kind of pissed off that they hadn’t got this thing properly arranged.
  And what do they think now, that it won’t come all next week?
  I would say, that if you’re willing to take a loan which you would repay when you get it, I’d be glad to make you a loan— [pause]
  You want to wait until Tuesday to see if it —
  Yeah, people really do create a lot ah, problems for you, but one thing that has a lot of meaning to me is that right now you’re — you’re facing the fact as well as you can that things that go on inside of you are damn upsetting to you sometimes, so much so that there are times when you would welcome being back in the hospital and I guess I feel two ways about that. I feel badly that ah, things have been that rough for you and I feel somehow sort of good about the fact that you’re trying to figure some of this out and to really face whatever the elements are in you that ah, and in your situation that ah, get you upset or off the beam — and I’d say too that ah, one reason I keep pushing you today, I’m sure, is that, God damn it, one of the things I’m pretty good at is helping people to get at what is really troubling them! If we can, if we can at all get to the bottom of what it is that sets you off and makes you nervous and what the experiences are that, that ah, give you this feeling of nothing really getting to you [pause] why we may be able to lick that too— [long pause]
  It is hard to find two different worlds, isn’t it?
  Mmm?
  Fight them, fight two different worlds, I see — mmm — yeah, you’re, am I getting it right? — naturally there’s a lot on the outside world to fight and make your way in, and so on, and then to fight the inside world too is that what you mean?
  Well, tell me a little more what you do mean when you say it’s hard to fight two worlds.
  Yeah, uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh — well if —
  All right.  Well, I’ve got a couple of procedural points to bring up too.
  O.K.
  Well, that’s…ah…we’ll see and if it’s true that’s O.K.
  One of the things that I wanted to…ah…say ‘cause I don’t know quite how this was explained to you, I’m here just this semester so that ah…I’ll be leaving Madison the first week in June probably some time.  So that, I don’t know how many weeks that means, guess it’s 11 or 12 or something, if you should decide to work on things, that would be the limit of what I could do.  Although, if then you wanted to go on, that would be…I’m sure we could arrange for someone else to continue seeing you.  And then the other thing that I'm sure has been mentioned to you, but I just want to repeat it to make sure, is that, as you probably know we’re being observed by a small group of psychiatrists and psychologists whose whole interest is just to see whether in studying the way different people work on their problems maybe they can find ways of working more effectively with people so that’s their interest.  Now, you say you’re feeling so good you don’t know whether you have anything to talk about, but if you want to tell me something of what brought you here in the first place I’m very…
  …very interested.
 Um-mm you mean…that even though it has been an up and down thing when you do come out there still is some…uneasiness or fear of the next one?
 Um-mm.
  Um-mm.  You really didn’t have very much more energy to…
  …get out of it.
  As though knowing; “O.K.  I can turn for help if things get rough;” that really seemed to…ah…
  …almost remove the problem.
  Um-mm, I see.  You mean there are various ways of explaining why talking with her…ah…seemed to help, that it sort of…I see.  It sort of made you feel, “Well, then there’s enough security somewhere that I can keep operating.”
  Um-mm.  If I caught the sound of that these conflicts in yourself are something you feel rather keenly, is it?
  So that is, when feeling in this, I guess that you’re saying; “I’m not in a bad way at the present time, so it seems a little silly to talk about myself as though I were or about problems that really aren’t immediate.”
 I see.  You’re feeling that, “Well; But I said I would do this,” and that you’re obligated to carry through, is that the feeling?
   But, it’s not --- and I guess one phrase of that makes me wonder --- it’s not so much it’s the obligation to the group that you feel, is that it?
  Now, I’d really like to get all that and I’m not quite sure I did.  The main threads of this…ah…conflict then is the fact that on the one hand, here you are, I don’t know, a professional person or becoming a professional person or something like that, and that’s where your stake is and that’s why you do things and so on; and then on the other hand, there’s this feeling; “But I’m a woman…too”, and…well, it isn’t “too”, but “I’m a woman on the other hand,” and it’s that that has pulled you both ways.  And then, I didn’t quite understand ah…seeing your father, you say, helped somehow intensify some of this because up to this point you had more identified with your mother, is that what you are saying?    Maybe I’m supposed to know some of the facts here, but I don’t.
  O.K.
  Your brother’s?  Um-mm.
  Just a sort of feeling of good riddance.
  Um-mm.
  Um-mm.  You feel that in a very real and true sense he did cast you off.
  Um-mm.  Well, at least they’re poles apart…
  ….in this respect.
 If I’m getting that part of it, it is that; since he does put himself first, that means that at times he might do things for you or care for you, but at other times he just won’t, and that’s something you’ll have to live with.
 Um-mm.
 Let’s see if I’m getting this whole part right.  The feeling was seeing your father really just and because he proved to be so different from what you had thought of him as being sort of put a real strong pull on you; it, it intensified some of these differences that you had already been feeling and if I’m getting it right, you feel that he’s saying or pulling you toward oh a somewhat more conventional life, perhaps and the thing I guess, that makes it hard for you to express it, is that you found that you really care for him, so what he says makes a difference and yet it leaves you with this very unresolvable kind of conflict; “O.K. so suppose I said I would get married and have children and so on, but how?  There’s no one in the picture and it’s just up against a flat wall.”  Is that something like you feel?
 You were doing nothing so there was nothing to be really concerned about, is that it?
 This seems so dichotomous, so much in one path or another that those who value you because you can think and have a brain don’t seem to even notice that you’re a woman and those that really feel that you’re a woman don’t seem to place any value in the fact maybe you can think.
 I see, that is, you might get something of both worlds, is that what you’re saying?
 I’m not quite clear on that, but is this what you think?  “Maybe I bring about, damn it, the kind of picture people have of me.”
 What you’re feeling is that this place wouldn’t even know a feeling if they saw one, is that….
 Um-mm.
 Um-mm.
 Um-mm.  Again it is kind of antithetical; if in your relationship, you say; I’m really an intellectual and act in those terms, then it’s no good for your work, and if you’re really working then in your relationships you don’t so much care to be an intellectual.
 You feel as though this, this covers the picture you have of you?
 The difficulties…
 You’re saying; so this is, oh really a very ordinary kind of problem?
 Um-mm.  So there, too, I guess you see both sides of it.  I mean, in New York, where there might be more people like yourself, that it might in some respects be easier, but still, does it really lead to a more satisfying kind of…
 ….adjustment?
 So you’ll be sort of glad to wash the dust of Madison off your feet, is that it?
 So that for the person who is somewhat different, who doesn’t fit, fit him to a conventional mold, this is a lousy place to be.
 That is, if in any sense rebel or, or choose a different path than this very constrictive life, then you feel that it is a pretty difficult spot to be.
 At any rate, what you know of the way of living, of single women who are not real youthful just seems pretty stupid, I guess that’s what you’re saying.
 It’s hard to use hard enough terms, huh?
 You feel; “How can they live the way they do;  what are they thinking of”?
 I guess you’re saying; “they may have found some way that is suitable for them, but whether I would want a way of life that doesn’t seem to have a place for normal sex relationships and so on, that I’m not sure of.”
 “That isn’t the life I want unless I’m absolutely forced to it.”
" Well, first I will answer that and first I’d really like to get the flavor of your feeling, that is, your concern is; “oh, I don’t think I’m being helpful to this group and I wouldn’t want to let them down, but I really don’t think that I’m much good in that respect,” is that what you’re saying?  and I guess I feel:  to hell with the group as far as I’m concerned, I mean, my whole concern is with you and whether there are things you want to work on, not necessarily well, I guess I would just put it this way, that  I realize that it’s been not easy for you to get into some of these feelings you have and in your own thinking you may feel; ""I don't want to go on and try to explore these things,” but my feeling is, and if you should feel that, that's o.k. and on the other hand that you want to see whether you want to explore it further and to see where you do find yourself going, then I’m very willing to do that and I don’t feel the slightest concern about the group."
 Essentially you’re saying; “I really was frightened and felt unable to get along, but now I feel things have worked out pretty well and I don’t feel that tension right at this moment,” and it seems to me, I guess you’re saying it seems to me as though psychotherapy is more for the person who feels more like you felt a while back.  Is that what you’re saying?
 So that is one issue that you do feel concerned about.  “What the hell do I do when I’m 30” but, how much of a problem that will be to you and so on; I guess you’re saying you don’t know.
 You feel as though; “30 marks the time when I’m no longer a student and no longer attractive, and then what?”    I see our time is just about up because I thought it’s been just about 45 minutes each time.  Then I guess I’ll…I’d just like to ask with no sense of long range commitment in any way, do you want to come back next week?
 Ah, I think I can, I think I have some understanding of how that seems to you that somehow you got us all into something that somehow you’re not measuring up to or something, is that perhaps how you’re feeling?  Well, I can understand that in you and as for me, I would just say that’s not in the least a matter of concern to me, so that when you say without reference to that, as far as I’m concerned, absolutely without reference to it in the least concern.
 All right, and if you do later want to see someone, then at least you know the channels, but you are fairly clear in your own feeling that you would personally prefer not to come back next week, right?  O.K.
 Sounds as though you're having trouble with being three different persons.    You're a mother of four  and a counselor type person and now trying to play the authoritarian role in the classroom too.    And inside that's meant a hell of a lot of chaos.
 Maybe sometimes when you're, when you're being your… your counseling self is more of your real self.
 And that's… the students respond to that.
 You, you can't let out your real self because you misunderstood or…
 Or you're thought to be a flirt.
 I feel, I feel your nervousness.  I feel that's… bringing up all kinds of things that are…
" But I do hear those things.  The uh, the uh, concern about your children and the feelings, ""Maybe I'm only cut out to be a counselor, and not a teacher.  And yet, I feel teachers are needed."""
 And uh, this recurring issue of how do I handle these uh, sort of sexy remarks that have come my way.
 And I guess you're raising a question is there a place for a nurturing person in the classroom.
 But you don't want to be just a math teacher.    You want to be a person.
" You set very high goals for yourself I guess you're saying and when you're, when you don't come through and they don't come through you feel,  ""Wow!  I'm no good."""
" So, it's really a big problem for you, you are feminine and you like to be feminine  and you're seen as feminine and reacted to in that way,  and then you think, ""Oh my God!  I better hide behind the desk."""
 I didn't, I didn't bring any Kleenex.
 If you were to live that over again what would you like to have said to him?
 What were your feelings at that time?
 But the, but the thing that rises first in you is quite a natural and somewhat sexy remark.
 But the, but the thing that rises first in you is quite a natural and somewhat sexy remark.
 I trust, I trust you don't regret having them.
 You feel proud of them but still you shouldn't take much credit for that.
 It's just heredity.  You didn't have anything to do with it.
" You're very reluctant to pat yourself on the back and then feel, ""I really did a good job."""
 You feel good about you in relation to her.
 I'll say so.
 But you're very quick to blame yourself for most anything.
 You would or wouldn't have?
 Very orderly.
 So some of your standards were just awful during that period  and things that shocked yourself.
 I guess, not only the illness but the fact someone else is having to take care of them.
" That's really very common to feel, ""I've really got to do this.  I've got to be this kind of a math teacher.  I've got to come this morning.    But another part of me doesn't want to, feels guilty,  feels bad."""
 Let me see if I can get that.  This is a fairly upset period for you and yet, you feel even your upsetness, you've been present and you've been good for the people who have been in contact with you.    But then, on the other hand, you should also be a good mother.  And you should be home  and take care of the children.    so that no matter what you do, it isn't quite right.
" But for an orderly person, that's tough to have to say, ""I can only do the best I can.  I don't even know whether it's right or wrong.    I may not know for a long time."""
 That's hard for me to respond to.  But I guess you feel that my presence may be a real help to you, too.
 So that's, that's really new experience too, to feel here's somebody who's supposed to be way up there and yet I'm really letting him know the kind of person I am.
 It also represents a tremendous change in you.
 So really, growth means a lot of different things.  It means pain and discomfort and tears.    It means satisfaction and feeling that I'm really maturing.    Mhm, hmm.
 And uh, the frequency with which you mention uh, sexy remarks  makes you realize that's a very real problem for you.
 You weren't expecting it?
 That you know they have sexual feelings towards you and warm feelings and evidently, they have loving feelings for you.
 You would like them to feel warmly towards you but…
 But you didn't anticipate this?
 You'll be what?
 Oh you'll be mean.
 If you cut them down to size you would handle it but that would not be you.
 Uh, huh.
 I'm interested when you say you don't think it will…  Well, you're partly being facetious when you say  it won't be a problem next year.
 That's a tough spot.
 So you really did express your feelings to the group and to him and that helped some.
 Whatever you do you feel there probably would have been a better way.
 This wasn't dished out with a teaspoon was it?
" ""Oh, what did I do?  Oh, my god."""
 You're pretty sure you'll put yourself down for some of the things that you've said.
 Okay.
" That's as hard as anything you've said that, ""Really, basically, I'm a good person."""
 So it's a real part of your life that you're high or low, that you have a wide range of feelings.
 You have to… you have to live with the ingredients.
 You might have mixed the cake a little bit different.
 Mhm, hmm.  Mhm, hmm.  But on the whole, you feel you're a pretty good person.
 Can we call it… can we bring to an end now?
 good.
 Now, uh, when you're ready I've thought a little bit about it.  I think it might be interesting if you would tell how this experience seemed to you.  I'll say how it seemed to me.  And then we can let them in on it.
 Yeah.  Mhm, hmm.
 Take your time.
 You're wondering what it meant for somebody else?
 And how did the experience seem to you?  What was going on?  Anything you want to say about that?
 Hmm.  And in that gesture indicates, it kind of opens you up.
 That's what I felt too.
 And I don't… I can well understand that you don't remember the negative feelings and scary feelings and I do sense the fact that you're calmer this morning.  I realize that.
 It sort of opened up more communication between the two of you?
 You, you have enjoyed them but it doesn't mean you enjoyed, or enjoyed the idea when you first learned of it.  And the same thing is true here that there's pain and distress connected with the experience, maybe you feel it's great afterward, but…
" So you feel it's supposedly by my choice but really, ""I didn't really choose to be here.  It's…"""
 In that respect, it's very much like the twins.
 Mhm, hmm.  You didn't choose that but there they were.
 Everybody else has it pretty well made.
 Are you ever taking a risk!  Huh!
 And so, you let out a big sigh, at the thought, that yes.  You are taking a risk and you don't know what's going to happen.
 Like a ferris wheel or something like that?
 No.
 There's some need to protect yourself…   against you're not quite sure.
 It's kind of one-sided knowing that they knew you and you didn't know them.
 That was part of the discomfort that you felt   I don't know how they're reacting to me really.  They know me and I don't know them.
 There's something that you don't like about being known and not knowing.
 So you want to say look, you only saw a small part of me.  There's a whole lot of other parts.
 It's, it's sort of a dubious honor, sort of a scary honor.
 No, I guess that I really want to say something here, I'm not showing a technique.  I'm Carl Rogers and I'm talking to Julia.  And Julia 's talking to me.
 And you can't botch up anything that I'm doing.
 You're quite right.  I had my chance and I also, I felt real, really annoyed at people who thought you were the star.  Because I don't, I don't think you were the star.  I don't think I was the star.  We were in a relationship together.
 I certainly didn't feel you were performing either.
 It's sort of hard to take in the fact that they really appreciated the fact that you were being yourself.
 It's very hard to let it in.
 I'm sorry?
 That's right.  That's right.
 It's not so bad.  There's a lot to be said for silence.
 To me that's the best part of it too, that you forgot who.
 And then you said a moment ago, you really had trouble handling Monday.  Monday did not only saturate you but it almost oversaturated you.
 If it's too much why the things you can't handle will just sort of settle out and you won't absorb them at that point.
 And you have a right.  Somehow this seems important to me.  You have a right to let uh, the things you can't quite handle at the moment sort of settle at the bottom and not be absorbed at the present time.
" It sounds to me as though you're saying, ""I really accept the fact that I'm not perfect.  I have limitations.  I won't always do everything just right.  But I'll do the best I can."""
" Mhm, hmm.  So it seems maybe as though I'm saying that.  And then realize, ""No.  That's what I'm telling myself.  That it's okay for me."""
 That's an important aspect of it though.  You forgot they're out there and so have I;
"  You're questioning yourself.  ""Am I doing something that I've read about, that I've learned,  or is this for real?"""
" So you know that it isn't reading something.  ""It is for me."""
" That's, that's marvelous.  ""There really are no answers in the back of the book for this sort of thing."""
 Somehow some of this reminds me of what you said about, about changing from dishing out your life in even teaspoonfuls to having to do it on a very different basis.    And I guess I hear you saying you're moving from the comfort of having the answer in the back of the book.  How nice it is to have that reassurance.  To feeling, no, the only answers are really answers that I find in me.
 But there was some feeling that I ought to be a good specimen.
 You realize that you have such a strong desire to please.
 What person is that?
 It sounds as though, on one hand it's being touchy which is kind of uh, got to handle with care.  The other side of it is being sensitive and you're pleased  that you're sensitive.
 Never good enough.
 But, but you're choosing your own way there.    You respond as you feel like.
 You're more confident being the pilot of your own ship.  And do it your way.  They're your children, you're responding to them.  You may change your course if you decide if that isn't the right course.
 That's putting it a little too strongly.
 It's more that you’re willing to make the best decision you can at the moment and, and then at a later point it seems like, another decision is better, okay.
" That's the main thing.  You feel inwardly satisfied that ""I did the best I could.  I did it as fairly or as with as much justice as I could."""
 Mhm, hmm.  I get very deeply the feeling that you can accept the fact that you can do what you can do and you can do the best you can do.  But that doesn't mean that everything will work out perfectly.
 You'd like them to be kinder to themselves.  And I guess you'd like to be kinder to yourself.
 You're very careful not to.
" ""Will it make me feel superior?"""
" There are times when you think, ""I'm pretty good""."
 You want to be able to accept yourself.  Even in your sloppy housekeeping?
 And you scold yourself sometimes.
 Let's see.  So, you accept both the fact that sometimes you're sloppy uh, but also the fact that you scold yourself for that.
" So you value the voice that says, ""You've really got to do this.  And keep up your standards.    And get those meals whether I like it or not."""
 I feel like you're working toward accepting the different aspects of you: this scolding aspect, the good aspect and the  tender aspect.
 At any rate what's coming out isn't at all what you rehearsed last night.
 Okay.  The thing is I didn't even look at the time I started.  Do you have any idea how long we've been going.
 Is it almost 11:00?
 Let's go for another five to ten minutes, okay?
 We can stop it when you wish.
 You couldn't help but be suspicious of your motives.
 You know that little girl is inside of you but you don't know if she played a very big part in this situation.
 So if there was any vanity in it, it would've been in the first moment or so but not after that.
 Okay.  Okay.  You can say that no matter what they might be thinking you're not bored and you're involved.
 Okay.  so, what you've been experiencing they may feel and understand and be moved by it themselves.
 To me, it's a real privilege to talk to you.
 Is there anything you'd like to say about this morning's session?
 You had to be responsible for me too.
 I really think that I can look after myself.  
 You were taking a risk.  But I always take a risk in this kind of situation.
 That's right.  That's right.  That's the kind of independence I was feeling today that I don't know, I just really respond to.  That you're responsible for yourself.  And you said my chance to talk more in the first interview if I wanted to and I didn't take it.
 There were some things in this interview that I think I'll remember for a long time.
 Okay, no I don't…  I'm not going to complement you.  I'm just going to talk about it for a few minutes  The kind of thing that I remember particularly was this notion of saturation of the grains that can't be absorbed and dissolved, just sinking to the bottom.  I think that's uh, that was such a perfect picture of your reaction to Monday and of the reaction a lot of people have that I think many counselors don't understand.  That people are ready at a certain time to handle so much, but not everything.  And so the rest settles out and that it seemed to me… you said you felt the need to protect yourself and that was your way of protecting yourself.  The stuff you couldn't absorb, integrate and take into your system just dissolved out and sank to the bottom of the cup, as you said.  That brings to mind one other thing to, that uh, somehow a lot of the most meaningful things in counseling get expressed in metaphors.  That metaphor says so much about what was going on and it was much better than had you described in psychological terms or something like that.    It just gives a feeling for the whole thing.  And it's always interested me that particularly when people get more deeply into things they tend to talk in metaphors.
 They aren't the kinds of things you think of consciously.    They just come to mind.    And uh, it was fascinating to me that you were showing a very different side of yourself this morning.  On Monday, you were sort of spilling over and this material wanted to come out and still you were scared of it when it did come out.  And today you were more, seemed to me you were more self-reliant uh, independent person in some control and so on.  And I liked, I liked the fact I've forgotten just what you had said, but you said, maybe in two or three days you'd be feeling quite differently.  And I think that's true, that you can accept that.  Sure, you can go up and down with our feelings, but today you're feeling, you're feeling a liking for yourself, I think.  Should we let them in now too?
 Do you have comments or questions you'd like to raise.  Okay, there's a microphone right there.
 I think that my experience has been quite different from what most people would expect.  Um, I know when I first tried, ah, interviewing people and being filmed, when I first tried interviewing someone in front of others um, it seemed to me that it must be an inhibiting factor.  It must be that the person would not be able to express the things that they would if they were just alone.  My experience seems to indicate that quite the contrary is true.  It seems as though, there is some added importance to the time or something.  When a person knows it's being filmed, knows that this is in front of an audience, um, there's sort of an inner compulsion to make the best possible use of the time so that I feel that rather than inhibiting what comes out I think often helps things to come out.  Um, and that I never would have expected; But to me that seems to be the case.  Oh, there was one other thing quite unrelated that I want to mention it fascinated me that when you said you're no longer aware of them, I've forgotten just how you put it, but it was just the two of us.  I had been thinking that exact thought just about two seconds earlier.  I really was fascinated by that, it seemed as though we were just in tune with each other.  Other comments or questions?
 Well, I think, probably observers are better able to answer that question than I am.  To, to see where perhaps I inject my own notions or my own opinions of her or what's going on um…
 It didn't ring true.
 Mhmmm, mhmmm.
 Mhm.
 Does that mean that you find it difficult to protect yourself?
" So you don't say, ""No,"" and you do a lot of caring things but somehow inside you, you do say, ""No."" You build a shell that, that . . ."
 A wall.
 Mhmmm. Mhmmm.
  Mhmm. Mhmm.
 Nobody listens to you but that's partly because, you put up a wall so that they can't see you or listen to you. Is that it?
 So, yes, you give up and you listen and you help and you care; but for you, there's nobody that listens, nobody that gets through to you.
 It must be sort of lonely in there.
 Hmm. Mhmm, mhmm.
" It's become a more pressing problem, is that what you're saying?"""
" ""I need to let somebody in.""  Maybe that's not right."
" Uh, huh. That's a little too much. At least you want to explore your loneliness to find out, ""why,"" but is it feasible that people who hear you would listen to you and be with you?"
 Why do they call you that?
 Mhmm, mhmm. Always available.
" ""I'll always give to you."""
" ""Call me in the middle of the night. That's okay."""
 There isn't anybody that you feel you could call in the middle of the night?
 Anybody can turn to you for help, but where do you turn for help? You don't know.
 Nobody really hears the person behind that fence.
 Not your husband, not your friends.
 Uh, huh.
 Maybe you don't even know the person who is behind that fence. Maybe you're not really in touch with her.
 Mhmm.
 Oh, that sounds like her.
 So you're not really well acquainted with that person behind the fence but you do have a sense that she's no good. She's not worth anything much.
 You are sort of ashamed of that selfish, arrogant and miserable person that's inside.
 Even though sometimes she pokes her way out through the fence.
 Mhmm, mhmm. Terrible. Mhmm, mhmm.
 Mhmm, mhmm.
 Mhmm, mhmm.
 You would really like to experience that sort of selfish. . .
 ... greedy, arrogant person; get to know her.
 She doesn't want that.
 Stay away from me.
 So that's the person you have to be. you can't get acquainted with this selfish, worthless person.
 Somehow that would be frightening.
" Mhmmm, mhmmm. ""I don't want to look at that dark side."""
" You may not want to be in touch with it but it keeps telling you, ""I'm stil1 here."""
" ""And don't you forget it."""
 It sort of won't let you alone.
 Mhmm, mhmm. Mhmm, mhmm.
 You can't shake it off.
 When you are caring for somebody else, it nags away at you.
 Clawing at you.
" Maybe, ""that person inside keeps me from really caring about anybody."""
 How could you possibly accept that, that kind of miserable person?
" ""It's not a part of me. I won't have anything to do with it,"" and still, it claws at you."
" ""Don't come in because I'm alone with this dark part of me and I don't want anybody..."
" ... in touch with me."" You're also saying, ""I can't possibly accept that miserable person. How can I accept someone who is . . ."""
" So if somebody else says I'm greedy and selfish and arrogant, ""I could accept that."""
 Sure.
 You seem to be a good counselor for somebody else.
  But not for you.
 There's something wrong with that.
" Mhmm, mhmm. ""How can it be that I can say, 'it's okay to be selfish,' I understand that, like everybody."" And then, ""But I can't possibly accept that I'm like that."""
 If someone, it strikes me you're so much harder on yourself than you would be on a client.
 Much more judgmental.
 That you can be a miserable person.
" ""Selfish, greedy and arrogant and clawing at me."""
" That's right. ""Stay down there, take a deeper place."""
 Uh, huh. Uh, huh.
" ""I don't have any place in my life for a naughty girl."""
" ""Quit sticking around."""
" ""Quit hanging around."""
" ""Go away."""
 So it's that part of you that helps you to understand the misery and the selfishness and the arrogance in somebody else.
 Nevertheless, it's a precious part of you because it helps you understand others. It sounds like that's what you're saying.
 You realize that if you could put it away entirely, that would be a real loss for you.
  So in some sort of crazy way, you do value it in yourself because it makes possible being helpful to other people.
 That you were better off without it.
 Then you realize . . .
" Now suddenly you realize that, ""I need that person."""
 It's pretty helpful.
" Mhmm. ""That sort of hits me."""
 Uh huh, uh huh. If you need it you've got to stop hitting it.
" It's hard to say that, but you realize, ""If I need it, I've got to start caring for that naughty little girl."""
 Uh huh. Hard to say it, but even harder to do.
 Mhm, mhmm. Mhm, mhmm.
" You would have to say, ""Make room for all of me, not just my good caring, helpful, kind generous self."""
 Mhm, mhmm. Mhm, mhmm.
"  Yeah. You'd just be tough enough to say, ""I'm not ready to listen to you now. I don't want to listen to you now."""
" ""I need the time to myself,"" or, ""I need something different for myself."""
 Wow.
" ""Who me?"""
 It is scary.
" Mhmmm, mhmmm. Suppose I told somebody, 'No. I can't listen to you now,' then I could feel very guilty about that. 'Oh, I'm not a helping person. I'm not a good person,' or you could feel, ""Oh, that's okay. That's human.'"
 It's what?
 Mhmm mhmmm. Mhmmm mhmmm.
 Mhmm, Mhmmm.
" It would be more you if you said that, than to pretend, ""Oh yes. I'm always feeling I don't want to."""
 You have.
 It's quite a job, isn't it?
 Mhmmm, mhmmm. You need to open up that fence or something and let more of you come out. Even that shitty person, that no good naughty little girl; find a place for her. So it comes into mind. Maybe you should adopt her.  Sounds like it's your homeless waif.
 She's what?
 Homeless, mhmmm, mhmm. That's right.
 She hasn't got any real secure home at all.
 Mhmm, mhmmm.
 Mhmm, mhmmm.
 Mhmmm, mhmmm.
 Mhmmm mhmmmm. She's you.
 You used to know her and be her, yet she's become really unknown.
 A little girl without a home. You're not known, you're not accepted, you're not loved.
 Uh, huh. She needed to have some protection that she wouldn't be completely homeless, rejected person so she put up that shell and hides behind it.
 Oh, but she needs a lot of loving.
 Mhmmm, mhmmm.
 I'm sorry, say it again.
 Just give, give, give.
 Now you realize that it's got to start with you. It's got to start with you loving that little girl.
 Before your love means very much to somebody else.
 There's nothing new about it, except in your gut.
" You've said it, you've heard it, but to feel, ""I really need to love myself in order to love somebody else!"" You really feel that in you, that's new."
 Mhmmm. Mhmmm.
 You've got to be this caring, giving person, but now you want to be this caring, giving person with you.
 You say as if she were one of your children, it seems to me she is your child.
 She is your own child.
 That's right.
 And she's led a kind of sad existence and needs to be . . .
 Put her away and became the sort of person you wanted, a nice, giving, generous, lovely person.
 Mhmmm, mhmmm.
 They are going to have to accept all of you. That you're a little girl and some of your selfishness, oh . . .
 Uh, huh.
 That's right.
 It sounds as if nobody had loved her.
" But you realize, ""that's what I've got to start doing."""
 But if you're a whole person maybe then they'll begin to love you, not just this generous . . .
 I think our time is almost up. You have something you want to say?
  It's incredible to meet you. But I'm very glad to have made the acquaintance of your little girl.
 Right, mhmmm, mhmmm.
 And now you've had this impulse, it's something that hasn't quite happened.
 And take care of your personal . . .
 Well certainly thank you very much.
 Pleasure, and I wish you all the luck in the world as you go home and try to look after her. I think she's worth looking after.
 Would you like to say anything to group about how the experience felt to you?
  Like peeling an onion.
 I know for me I felt that very quickly that I could get in tune with you, I don't know it wasn't difficult and I felt there was one time when I got a little too deep with what I said and you were frightened a little and pulled back.
 But, uh . . .
 And then when you began to use the metaphor, you began to use metaphors particularly about this dark side of you, the shadowy side. I thought, okay it's going to be alright and then the little girl was very real to me and I, I just felt well, I felt what I often do in what I have mentioned I think, in this group. I felt a sense of awe. It really is incredible how given the opportunity a person does put aside layer after layer after layer. If this is a safe plus, acceptant relationship; and what you said, you described what I want to be, a companion to a person, in a search I want to be there with them, not pushing ahead, not looking behind, but just be there with them where they are and I felt good about the way I did that with you.  I don't know how to make the transition to the large group but I think this is not the time for a lot of intellectual questions about therapy. There will be a group on client-centered therapy this afternoon but I hope maybe now the group could pick up again with its own process. I don't quite know how we go from here to there, but I do appreciate it very much, talking with you.
 Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
  So in some way his, his death, uh, really made you aware of the fear you have of, of new relationships, especially with men.
  So that, the feeling you have is something more than just the loss of him.  It's a different feeling, a fee1ing of uneasy or scared or unsure.
  It’s as though you're in some way sort of responsible for your loneliness.
  And that's something you'd like to break out of that shell, or that safeguard that you've been hiding behind.
  Part of you does.  Ok, ok.
   So it really is a very ambivalent, two-way thing.  I suspect it's been pretty comfortable, um, behind that safeguard; it's more of risk if you break out.  Is that part of it?
  Uhm, hmm, it's just too damn risky, taking the possibility of being hurt again. And you've withdrawn from that for a long time.
  So that the knowledge isn't new, it's the um, question of what you do about it.
  The way you shake your head makes me feel, “I don't see any way.”
 Just seems kind of unbearable to, to be, open with a person and yet feel safe.
 I see, I see.  If you can keep the focus on the other person you're ok.
 But love, you want to, keep that at arms length.
 Uhm, hmm.
 Not quite sure I get that.  You mean friendship is a necessary first step, is that what you're saying, or…
 Uhm, hmm, that's what I was sort of thinking.  You've thought your way this far, but then where do you…
 So that, in this relationship it's like in your other relationships.
 It goes so far and then, “Let's stop.  That's as far as I want to go.”           If you go any further, there's a risk, isn't it?
 And I think your eyes tell me you're feeling that risk right now.  
 It's all right up to this point.
 So let’s laugh it off.
  Could, very easy to run away from yourself.
 And let the scared part come out when, when you’re ready for it, when…
 And when you feel safe enough, either in this relationship or with other people, then you can let yourself come out of the cave and let the scared part of you emerge.
 I'm, I'm really interested in that experience, when you were away from him, then there was just a little while, when it felt safe.  And you could perceive…
 Yeah, when you were driving and you could perceive yourself and the whole situation, I guess.
 You let yourself for that time come out of the cave.
 Ah, is that right.
 But somehow, having, having come out of the cave, you were afraid you might come out of the cave too easily.
 “So, watch out, be careful”.
 You sound like a very tender, vulnerable part of you that lives in that cave.
  Your most?
 Your most tender part. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  It's really a very precious part of you that you keep in the cave
  Without?
 Yeah, I see.
 So, you, the hopelessness, I gather is because you know you're not living with all of you.  Part of you you're keeping well hidden.
 Well guarded.  And it isn't really living, unless you can live it with all of you.
 Those are the things that touch your feelings.
 Ok, things that touch your feelings or touch the core of you, those you want to stay away from.
 They got, they get too close, too close to this very tender part of you.
 Uhm, hmm, but you felt safe enough to let out a little bit more and now it’s come to another stop.
 Ok.
 Uhm, hmm.
 Uhm, hmm, what am I doing getting that close to the vulnerable part of you?  “Damn it, stay away.”
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
 So you’re putting up all kinds of guards against me, and striking out, “What the hell are you doing”, and, “getting so close to the vulnerable part of me, why don’t you go do something else”, hmm?
 Uhm, hmm.  So that, that pushing away part, that kind of angry, “Get away from me” part, is what keeps you very lonely.
 What I hear is that, is that you feel that I don’t really care, just a story…
 Just something… but what if I do …
 But what if I do care.
 Yeah.
 You've earned some points.
 It's uh, when you've let out a tender part of yourself, then it’s damned important to know, “Does this other person care?  Does it make any difference?”
 Uhm, hmm.  You need a response, you need a caring, you need to make a difference to somebody.
 It makes so much difference to you to know whether the other person is going to really respond.  “When they say they care, do they care?”
 And that's not enough?
 Uhm, hmm, it isn't as though you want a whole meal, it's that…
 That's kind of a, contradiction, in a way. A dilemma, it's a dilemma.   But you feel what you want first is a relationship with a person, only it helps if it’s a man.
 It isn't just better if it's a man, it's a necessity.
 So that's where you fear is, a fear of a relationship with a man.  And yet, you'd like to be able to really come out of the cave first, before it became a man-woman, sexual relationship, or anything like that.  Is that what you're saying?
 And then ask?
 But first, you'd like to have a man come at least to the entrance of the cave and take the hand of you as a little girl and lead you gently out, caring for you. Then maybe, other kinds of things might happen.
  The little girl, the little girl will grow up if you care enough, for her.
  Can you tell him that? Could you tell him that?
  I was thinking of this, this one man.
 Uhm, hmm.
  Maybe you could let him know what you need.
 You're so much a nurse that when you even think of saying, “But I need this for myself.” that seems kind of wrong, selfish.
 “You're supposed to be caring for the other person.”
 But once in a while you realize, “I'd like to care for myself, first.”
 Just to say that.
 Just to say that, seems, “What a selfish person I am.”
 “Terrible, awful.”
 It's fun just to imagine, “I might want something for myself, first.”
 Just being good to yourself.
 So you have a real respect for your, for your instinct for preserving yourself.
 You can't trust everyone, not everyone would care.  
 And you say that with a smile, but that's pretty deep too isn't it?
 “I care for myself”.
 “I really prize myself, and I'm proud of that.  I'm not going to just give myself away.”
 To be able to care for yourself, and yet open yourself up to life, and somehow that also tied up with the realization that, “You know, death will come one day.”   You'd like to live before you die.
 You don't really open yourself to joy.  I guess fun, yes sure.
 Well, “Lets change the subject.” .
 Um, it'd be pretty nice to just, run away from some of this.
 Just talk.
 I'm impressed with the fact that when you need a rest, you really take it.
 It's one of the ways in which you preserve yourself.
 And, and this morning has been an example of the fact that you're not going to go so fast that you crash.   You're going to go at your own pace if its step-by-step down the hill, oh, that's the pace you have.
 Maybe that's a good stopping point.
 Not a thing and when I talked to you and we arranged this appointment I didn't even ask you one thing so I don't . . .
 Mhm, hmm.  Mhm, hmm.
 So the thing that you're clearest about is that you do want to do something about the problem . . .
 But as you've tried to think it over you sort of go around and around in circles.
 And have come to feel that maybe the most important thing for you is to try to figure out what's true right now, or what's the situation right now.  Is that, uh?
 Mhm, hmm.  I see rather than to go back into the past.
 It's what you wouldn't mind having but . . .
 But you doubt if you'll find it.
" It makes you feel as though in that area too you had a tendency to think, ""Now there is a key . . . """
" "". . .  And if I find the thing I'll be a good musician.""  But gradually you've learned it's just . . . ."
 But you do feel it's kind of characteristic of you that anything new you are a little fearful . . .
 Hmm.  Mhm, hmm.  Mhm, hmm.  Mhm, hmm.   It might . . . I guess what you're saying is that maybe it's supposed to be you solve the problem or something but the thing you really feel is that you would hope very much that I would.
" Mhm, hmm.  In other words, I guess you're saying there, ""I've wrestled and wrestled with this thing and I don't see a bit more about it.  I don't understand it a bit better than I did at the outset."""
 You feel that it's just a, a mystery to you as to how a person would make a start  in changing himself  or understanding himself.
 Mhm, mhm.
 Mhm, hmm.  Mhm, hmm.
 I guess you're saying there you, you've tried going through the behaviors of being interested in girls  and yeah, there's some, some reality to that.
 So that for you one of the big reasons for wanting to change is the social attitudes towards homosexuality.
 Mhm, hmm.  So you feel it isn't in itself fully satisfying now but even more  weighty is the fact that as you look ahead, you don't like that at all.
   Mhm, hmm.  Mhm, hmm.  Yes.  I sort of get the feeling that you're saying there are various cultural and intellectual considerations on this.   But several of those are outside the realm of your own experience.
" But you feel that when you're labeled ""homosexual"" then it's as though  you're no longer a person at all.  You're just somebody that . . ."
 That label really destroys you as a person and  and just puts you in a class.
 Mhm, hmm.  But at least you're saying other people haven't put you into that category it's just the realization  to you of what that would mean.
" Mhm, hmm.  That is the feeling though that, ""If they really knew, then they would put me in this awful, disapproved of class."""
 Mhm, hmm.  That's the kind of thing you don't understand.  All you're quite sure of is that, that your feelings do change to some degree from time to time.  Because there have been periods  when you've felt quite strongly heterosexual in your interests.    And other times when I guess it feels to you a little bit as though it was a going back or something like that?
" ""What am I going to all this effort for?"""
" But you feel as ""It's true that, this isn't, this doesn't have to much to do with what goes on outwardly in my relationships.""   ""It's something within me."""
 It's hard to keep putting on an act.
 You feel in a sense that you're always following a fairly involved script.
 Mhm, hmm.  It's sort of as though you are going in one direction but this act that you can put on is going off in another direction.
" Is this what you're saying though that . . . that when you and this uh, false front get too far apart then it just seems very necessary to you to get some kind of escape  entertainment and that you realize, evidently realize rather suddenly, ""Yeah that's what I went through when I came down here to go to school."""
" ""I just cannot keep up this act permanently."""
 Mhm, hmm.  You really scold yourself if you waste too much time.
 Mhm, hmm.  It sounds as though right in the piano playing you certainly experience this impulse toward time wasting.
 I mean, in the practicing.  I see.  Mhm, hmm.
 Mhm, hmm.  Whether it's the newness of it or what, that brings this about. At least there's a feeling that, whatever you do in you're practicing is tied in some way with a lot of other things.
 Mhm, hmm.   There is a feeling there that changing yourself to play a new piece or getting into this new experience is something for you that's slow and difficult and like changing yourself.
 So you don't feel that you understand them, though maybe it's when you've been going in circles for a long time.  But at least there are times when you just feel terribly down.
" It's sort of a feeling that, ""Where I used to be pretty clear  and sharp and now I'm confused and . . ."""
" Mhm, hmm.  ""I just muddle through.  I don't really do things clearly or well."""
 There's some of those things that can seem very distressing at the time and you'd just love  to have a chance to talk them out.
 So you can, hardly, hardly remember clearly what all the strain and stress  with your family was about.
 Maybe you get into them by choice or something or . . .
 It is as though whatever the experience is in these kind of black times at least when you're out, it's as though you had no . . .
 I guess you're saying there that perhaps objectively they really may be trivial things.   But when you're in that mood they're enormous things.
" Hmm.  So you're saying that it could be that, ""If I'm really in a mood to be depressed then anything,  anything will do."
" You feel, ""Maybe I'm roaming around, but I'm sure it's all tied together."""
 Mhm, hmm.  I guess there's a vague feeling there that somehow the two things are . . .
 Is this what you're saying that perhaps you use what you see as your central problem . . . as kind of an excuse uh, for the fact that you're mentally lazy?
 You doubt if it's a mechanical difficulty or using the wrong method or something but, more that . . . there's something deficient in you in that respect.
 Mhm, hmm.  So that you can make excuses for yourself but still, underneath that there's a very strong feeling you are lazy.
 I guess you feel that this ability to sleep or daydream or a combination of the two, is this real proof that you are lazy.
 Maybe what?
" ""Maybe I choose to sleep rather than the other alternatives."""
 It sounds as though you're wondering . . . .  Isn't there perhaps some, some one unified problem and maybe it isn't as much . . .
" Mhm, hmm.  ""Some problems would have sharper social aspects and some would not.    But isn't there really in me one quite unified problem whatever it is?"""
 Yeah that seems . . .
 Mhm, hmm.  Mhm, hmm.  And at least there's the kind of vague feeling that, all these different things may be quite tied in together, and that dreading to wake up and face a new day is not as dissimilar from some of these other problems as it might be.
" That is . . . you're sort of . . . I guess what you're doing is trying to feel out the implications of this and realizing, ""Well certainly this doesn't change just by saying, 'Okay, now  tomorrow I will  change.'"""
 It's sort of as though if you've taken one step forward then you like to . . .   Yeah.  You like to spread out.
" ""Let's not move forward."""
 You feel there again that's kind of the same pattern.
 You sort of feel as though it's surprising the extent to which this does seem to be a theme  of being afraid of the new day, the new task . . . the new . . .
   Mhm, hmm.  Mhm, hmm.  You sort of realize that even back there the past tended to look better and yet, that you might have been really deceiving yourself  about that.  That when it was, when it was the present it maybe wasn't so hot.
 I see our time's about up for today.
 Mhm, hmm.  Uh, would you like to come back at 11:30 next Saturday?
 Mhm, hmm.
 Okay.
 I'll try to be ready on time.
 Okay.
    Mhm-hm. But there’s just a feeling maybe that you were trying too quickly to see it all as a pattern or something like that?
     Mhm-hm. You feel, this is me all right, putting everything off till the very last minute and then  having to pay the consequences but not learning from it.
     So the question you’re asking yourself is, “Why do I live in this, uh, hanging-on-by- my-fingertips fashion or something  and just getting things in at the very last minute or even too late?”
    And you’re saying, “Maybe I do this in some sense to make life more difficult  as though I deserved for it to be.”  Or something.
     And then, I guess, at the moment the feeling is, “I don’t see any real way of making sense out of all this. Whether all these things are that are related or not, I don’t know.”
     And am I getting this right? That if you were to ask yourself, “Well, now, what really bothers me emotionally?” It would be these day by day things, is that, is that what you’re saying?
     Yeah.
      Mhm-hm. “The things that I seem to get concerned about on a day-by-day basis are, why don’t I get, why don’t I get things in on time?”
     “Why would I follow a course of action that, intellectually at least, really seems quite, quite stupid. Unless it is that, uh, unless it is that in some fashion, I want to do things the way I do it?”
   But I guess if I’m getting it, right, uhm,  that seems like quite a logical answer.  But it isn’t something that you really feel. You don’t feel that you want to do things, this, uh, stupid way or whatever.
   So that you can say, “I should turn over a new leaf. I should do things differently.”  But you’re feeling is that there is really nothing within you that really persistently wants to do that.
   There’s, there’s one little change that, uh. . .
   And I guess you’re telling yourself, “Yes, there have been one or two little things, very small things that, that have been a little different  .”
   I guess, it sounds like, it gives you very real pleasure even if those  things were quite small.
    It made it sort of possible to feel, “Well, to some degree, some of the time, I have some focus.”
   But it’s the, at least, temporary focusing sometimes during this past week with these different wandering searchlights  that, uh. . .
    Mhm-hm. That’s more a picture that you’d like, is that right?
   Where’s the plane you’re suppose to be  focusing on? 
   So if you don’t know what you’re looking for, it’s not too surprising you haven’t been able to find it.
    Mhm-hm. Whatever you do, you don’t want to arrive at some pseudo-solution of things.
   Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. It is to find the central problem or issue, I guess, that’s what you’d like. But you don’t want to be deceived there either by following something that seems right in the abstract. . .
    It seemed then there is some central, definable problem  and now. . .
   Mhm-hm. Except now this week you feel, “Well, I’m not at all sure that what I saw there was really deeply so and I don’t feel  quite that way.”
    Sort of a feeling, “I took one step forward and one step back.”
   And you’re saying there, too, that, “The place I had sort of thought I had gotten, I don’t think now I really got there. But the little changes that did occur, like, uh, reading more critically, I don’t know where those came from, they just. . .”
    They just happened.
    You sort of realize it’s most unlikely there will be any miracle on this.
   Mhm-hm. It’s that part of the perplexity that you’re expressing, that when you’re right in the middle of this storm, how do you know what way to go?  How do you start from scratch?
    There’s some really strange quality to that, a, a feeling, “I don’t know. I don’t have any idea what I really want to do.”  Yet somehow you wound up. . .
    Mhm-hm.  And I gather there’s some quality to it, “I don’t understand what this was all about.”
   Mhm-hm. But, but there was a feeling, “This symbolizes me somehow.”  “Caught between different things and knowing perfectly well what I should do, but really not knowing at all what I want to do.”
   No, I think I really catch that.  That, that, uhm, intellectually, you could say quite clearly what you want.
    I see. That’s more as though, “I really do know intellectually and emotionally where I want to get, but there seem to be forces in me that, uh. . .”
   “Do something to mess it up on the way.”
    It’s a real addiction.
   Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. So that you do give importance to the long-run,  but I gather in the, in the present, movies have this really compelling pull somehow that, that has nothing to do with the movies, really, it’s, it’s something you must have.
    Mhm-hm. I don’t know how strongly you mean that last word. But as though  sometimes just out of annoyance of something
   Mhm-hm.   “I seem to find myself doing the things that I know make life tough, uh, and unsatisfactory.”
   Mhm-hm. Mhm-hm. All you have is the feeling that, “Somehow I’m going around and around  something, but I don’t know what the something is.”
    You feel it’s really. . .
   And I guess you’re saying. . .
    I guess you’re saying, “I kind of like the fact that I was sort of organized  last week and going somewhere, even though maybe the somewhere I got, I wasn’t quite, uh,  where I thought it was.  And this week, I feel as though this is more characteristic of me.”
    “Just kind of going around in a circle and never getting to whatever it is that’s in the center.  But I, I don’t like it.”
   Sort of feeling, “Look, I can go somewhere.”
    That seems to be, “What my situation needs is orderly thinking and yet look what I do? Here,  I’m doing the same kind of thing I always do, just, uh,  jumping around or something.”  
   Yeah. I guess, you’re saying, “I’m experiencing right now, right here the thing that is almost most characteristic of me, of just being  in a kind of muddled situation and not really knowing what it’s shape is  or what it has in it.”
    Mhm-hm.  So you’re pretty sure that the way it is now, is very much the way it was in high school, too.
   Maybe the other people are muddled too, huh?  But I guess, uhm,  I wasn’t quite clear the way you put it, but what I got is, uh, “This is the way I am, but don’t misunderstand me, I realize there is a better way of doing things.” Is that?
   “This is not necessarily permanently me.”
   So it seems as though this, uh, this feeling of confusion and muddling through and so on, that really seems to be the thing that is of more immediate concern than homosexuality, for example.
   Mhm-hm.  I guess, you’re saying there, “I must be divided in some way because if I wasn’t divided  I would have done whatever I think I want to do.”
   “I’d like to know what it is in me that is working against me and maybe those feelings or forces or whatever they are, could be turned to constructive use.” Is that?
   Mhm-hm. You feel, “I don’t, I don’t really know what these oppositional forces are in me.  All, the closest I can come to pinning them down is that they seem to be some desire to get away, escape the pressures.”
    Mhm-hm. So that, “If it weren’t for the pressures on me. . .”
    Wouldn’t do anything, right.
    Mhm-hm. Feeling as if. . .
    Mhm-hm. It isn’t what you want and yet there’s also a realization, “If I were just left to myself, I wouldn’t do a damn thing.”
     Sort of. . .
   Is this putting it too strongly? “If there weren’t external demands on me, there is nothing in me that would move forward.”
    You mean, I’m wrong?
    Where did I put that?   That there would be nothing in you that move forward, I guess, is what I said.
    I see. Uh-huh. All right. That. . . In other words then if there were no – let me try rephrasing it to see if I can catch your feeling.   “If there were no external demands on me,  I’d probably would do nothing, but there would still be in me some feeling that I should be moving forward.”
     Mhm-hm. There still would be a desire even though. . .
    Mhm-hm. You feel that really then, the demands on you to meet deadlines and so on are kind of fortunate for you because it saves you from facing the complete frustration you would feel if, if nobody  forced you to do anything.  And yet you felt very much divided within yourself.
   “If it weren’t for all these demands for conformity I really would feel worse off inside then I didn’t. . .”
    Mhm-hm. So there’s, just using that for an example, you would kind of feel more deeply torn and feeling, “I did enjoy it and did appreciate it.”   But still knowing you would do nothing about it.
   That is to see some sense in what you’ve been saying makes you a little more aware of it and some of the ways in which you’ve deceived yourself, is that, uh?
   You have been protesting and protesting these social demands. “And  now I realized that without them I might be more unhappy than I am with it.”   I hadn’t noticed, but I see our time is up.
    Unless you want to say something more?
     Shall we make it next week at the same time?
    Okay.
 Mhm, hmm, Mhm, hmm.
 Uhm, hmm.  So that’s one immediate thing of concern.  “Am I ready to face whatever’s involved in moving away from the spot where I’ve...?”
 Mhm, hmm, Mhm, hmm, you get sort of used to it and...
 Yeah, yeah.  That you felt he didn’t quite understand you on that , that really...
 Mhm, hmm.    And if I, if I sense some of your feeling now, it is, uh, a little tenseness that, that, uh, maybe he didn’t really get that.  Maybe he thought you were,  sort of,  ...shutting him off, or something.
 Mhm, and that...
 Mhm, mhm...and I’m not quite sure about this…is it in the ward where you are now that you feel, yeah, they seem to make you so important, but then really you’re not?    Is that...?
 I see.  So that if you’re not very important where you are right now, you feel then if you were transferred,...
 ...even less so.  So that’s something that concerns you.
 Mhm, mhm.  But it, ah, it troubles you as to whether you’re really ready to face some of the things that would be involved.
 I see.  It’s more a question of facing the uncertainties, is that what you mean?
 Right now you feel kind of mixed up?
 I see.
 So that there’s something that’s real confusing.   It would be putting you next to a person who seemed to like you, and put her arm around you, and by gosh, was responsible for shock treatment.
 Mhm, what you heard, the explanation was doctor’s orders and all that, but you can’t help but feel, “Is she really trustworthy,” ‘cause here she seemed to...
 Mhmm, kind of all or none.
 Uhm, hmm.  And, and really, with most people you feel, “I don’t think I trust ‘em.”
 Mhm, hmm.  That’s one thing that you feel has really dropped out for you, that to, that just to, just to trust people.  Not for you.
 Mhm, hmm.  If you really believe in someone, and let your trust go out to them, then...
 Mhm, hmm.  But evidently your feeling is that when that has happened in the past...
  That’s the way you can get hurt.
 That’s the way you have been hurt.
 Mhm.  It isn’t that, at least what I understand you to be saying, is that it isn’t the practical question of the move so much that, uh, but it’s the question of...ah...
 Yeah, are you, are you ready for a next step, is that it?
 Mhm, hmm, uhm, hmm.  You feel, “Something was wrong over there”.  Too much electricity or something.  “That really had a bad effect on me when I was working there.”
 Mhm, hmm.  You feel really you, you were in, in kind of a desperate way, at those points?
 I see.
 It was just something very odd happening to you.
 Hmm.  It just made you feel real puzzled.  “What is happening to me?”
 Mhm, hmm.  Well, maybe, maybe shock treatment is really something they may use for punishment if you don’t do the things the way they want you to do?
 So to you it seemed, “Here I was just beginning to come to life a little, to really to know a little bit, what was going on.”
 And then you feel that for no reason you could discern, zingo, you were...
 Uhm, mhm, Uhm, mhm.  It feels that, as though that sort of brought out the worst in you, is that what you mean?
 Ah, hah.  Almost seemed as though this...
 But there, too, I guess I get the feeling that you’re wishing you could understand that part of yourself; was it something that was not you talking, or was it just the effect of the drugs, or what was it that made you...
 Yes, I did notice.
 And you would like me to understand that it isn’t just  tenseness or something  It’s, simply the...
 ...uncontrollable tickling sensations.  
 It seems as though being in a group, makes this worse.
 Well, probably it’s just the drugs.
 Mhm...   
 Do you?
 Uhm, hmm.  And in that sense they, they’re somewhat helpful in   making you think more clearly afterwards?
 Mhm, hmm, Mhm, hmm. That really it seems as though getting things out to some degree in talk...
 Yeah, yeah, part of the, part of the disturbance of that noise is the feeling, “My god, could this happen to me?”
 So this seems kind of ...awful, that here is this person and..
 ...next to you and so on, and now here it’s just going on and on...
   It’s kind of discouraging in a sense to feel that they, it seems to you, that they aren’t helping her.
 Almost makes you feel, “Are they making her worse with their drugs?”  Is that..?
 And that’s kind of a disturbing...
 ...thought, too...
 It can’t help but raise the question in you, “Would the drugs they’re giving me make me like that?”
 Those things are kind of...
 Uhm, hmm.  So in a sense, you can hold yourself enough so you’re not going to bat your head against the wall, and yet it’s as though it has to come out somewhere, and it, uh...
 Comes out in the tickling of your knees. Mhm hmm.
 “Well, by gosh I’m not going to smash my head against walls.”
     I guess that’s a question...
 I guess that’s the question you’re asking yourself, “What earthly good...?”
 You’re asking me.  Well, I’m not on the hospital staff.  And, I, I really guess I wouldn’t try to answer ‘cause I don’t know her, and don’t know anything about it.  But what I can understand is, is the way that that affects you and the feelings that it stirs up in you.  ‘Cause sounds as though, with you, that, that is disturbing not only from the noise from her, but the things that it stirs up in you.
 It’s a real tough choice to make.
 Uhm, hmm.  That you feel that, uh...kind of in a spot...
 If it, if it represented a chance to rest then you might like it.  But, if it’s a chance just to work all the time, uh, then you’re not sure that, that’s what you want.
 “I could do it, but uh, am I really ready for it?”...
 “Why?”  Mhm...
 Mhm.  Ah, a chance you’re willing to take although within yourself you feel a lot of question about it.
 It kind of helps you inside, when they get to, when they get better.
 So that you’re sort of discouraged and encouraged of what happens to others.
 That’s part of your feeling all the way through, “I haven’t done anything wrong, I’ve held myself in, I’ve, I’ve, I really have not been violent, I haven’t broken many rules...”
 “Haven’t broken any...”
 Uhm, hmm.  But your feeling is, “I’ve been good.”
 But in terms of what you can do, you feel you’ve done the best you can do.
 Uhm, hmm.  Loretta, I know that some of these people have got to go, and I expect we’ve got to call it quits.  I appreciate this chance to talk with you.
  It’s been nice to talk to you.
  It's not part of the way I usually operate. If you'd like to, would you like to have the drawings here to talk about them or not?
 Okay. I don't know.  let somebody else get them.
  And you want to say something about each one?  You say this is the first one, huh?
 It may have been a very small incident, but still it symbolized some things for you.
 Both the longing and the fear.
 Uhm, hmm.
 They somehow seem to belong together and yet they came out quite differently.
 And one, if I understand it, one is sort of polarized.  The other is, is real joyous.
 Uhm, hmm. So it's sadness for him in his situation but sadness on your part that you don't know him.
 And I don't know, you mentioned failure. I don't know, are you speaking about his or about yours in his eyes?
 Hm?
 So in the eyes of your father, in the eyes of your tutor, sometimes in the eyes of yourself, you've often been a failure even though in regard to the tutor, you feel, “I'm right and he's wrong. I'm not a failure”.
 Hmm?
 Your heart says, “He might be right. He might be right.”
 “Maybe I'm a failure.”
 And I notice you didn't mention the third picture.
 I assume.
 Yeah.
 Uhm, hmm. So that's that.
 Uhm, hmm. It looks like the strongest of the three.
 So, in your feelings, that's you welcoming the sunrise, and standing on a cliff.
 That you are the sunrise.
 Emerging from darkness.
 Uhm, hmm.
 I say, it looks like it looks like that was sinking in.
 Uhm, hmm.
 A very good feeling.
 Okay. Uhm, hmm.
 Bloody marvelous is right. Was your tutor a woman?
 Oh, funny, I had visualized he was a man.
 I see. Uhm, hmm Uhm, hmm.
 So that's another version of the sunrise.
 Uhm, hmm. And quite bloody marvelous, hmm? 
 Sounds a little bit as though that dark woman inside of you has been moved outside somewhat. Maybe that's not right.
 Okay.
 Maybe some other strength is in there?
 Uhm, hmm.
 Maybe you can retain some of the healthy parts of her but not the condemning part.
 Yes, I can see that. Uhm, hmm. It looks as though you look at it and look at it and, “That really is me”.
" Uhm, hmm Uhm, hmm. ""Why have you been so slow, for heaven's sake?"""
 “I know. Terrible.”
" You thought, ""I'm in a good place so what in the world is there for me to say?"""
 And I get the feeling this is sort of a celebration.
 You are drawn to that! 
 I know the feeling. Can't take your eyes off your masterpiece! 
  I'm sorry?
 Yes. Yes, I, I like to look at that. Uhm, hmm.
 Mmm. It looks like you're really appreciating it and appreciating you.
" Uhm, hmm. A sense of wonder and a sense of, ""Really?"""
" ""I gave birth to that."""
 Mmm. “It makes me feel that I really could do something.” Uhm, hmm.
 A person like that could do something.
 Uhm, hmm.
 I wasn't sure of what you said. You wanted to acknowledge that in yourself or you wanted her to acknowledge that in what, in what you did last night?
 Okay. Okay. Yeah.
 You wanted the dark woman in you to acknowledge that.
 I guess, you can see she acknowledged it.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. You really can't stand this talk because of what are the feelings you sense behind it?
" And yet now you're wondering, ""Maybe I could get close to him, maybe I could even be of help to him?"""
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. If you can take that back with you inside, why… mmm.  I guess in the way you put that, you're not quite sure but that's what you'd like.
 I can't help but say that picture's going to be engraved on your brain. Isn't it?
 Hm?
 Oh.
 Mhm, hmm.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Thinking about him takes the sunshine away sort of. You feel, feel for him. Sounds like he's very much in your thoughts and feelings.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
 So his freedom of expression stopped with the telephone? 
 But you feel he did have a taste of it.
 You really want very much for him to go through the kind of process that you're going through.
 Hmm?
 Yeah. You wish very deeply he could paint a picture like that.
 Mmm. You feel he has a dark critic inside of him.
 It seems very short to me, but they say that our time is about up.
  Mhm, hmm.
 You really drank in that picture, didn't you?
 Mhm, hmm.
 Mhm, hmm. It just had a magnetic power.
 Mhm, hmm. Can we leave it with you looking at your painting?
 Okay.
 That's very good. Uh, again if you feel like it, you can say a little bit about what the experience seemed like to you and I'll do the same.
 Mhm, hmm. No dark woman is going to tell you whether it was right or not.
 You weren't talking about problems, you weren't sufficiently relaxed, all kinds of things wrong.
 Only they weren't.
 Mmm, not properly dressed! 
 Mhm, hmm.
 Mmm. It was an unusual experience for me, uh, because usually people do come because they have some problem. And, uh, it was really very refreshing to have, I don't know, to sort of be present at the emergence of the new woman. That's . Mhm. Mhm. And, uh, it's a little bit weird that here we were making use of all of the procedures of expressive therapy! 
 So maybe it's okay after all, that's right. Really.
 That's right. It's, uh, I guess one aspect for me. If this had been… well, I can think of a time when in Germany before quite a critical audience, uh, a woman volunteered to be a client and then it turned out, well, she just, just wanted the satisfaction of being with me, so. And, uh, then I felt a little bit differently.
 But, uh, although even out of that came some very significant things. And, um, anyway, this time I didn't feel… I, I felt, uh, what you were, what was happening would be O.K. with the group, so I felt relaxed, too. I, I did feel relaxed and sort of, uh, sort of an amused note in my feeling. I don't know quite… I don't want to be taken wrong, but, yeah, I could, I could be a little light about it, like admiring your masterpiece and things like that.
 Uh, because, uh, I was sure that would be all right with you or something, too. Uh, uh. So that it was, uh, enjoyable and different and, uh, and I certainly felt very close to you, uh. And, I guess, it's interesting, it's the same kind of closeness whether a person is in pain or if…  a week ago, when I got here or something, uh, you could have been in pain and, uh, and yet it's perfectly okay that you're feeling, feeling pleased with yourself and…
 Mmm, and that I could relate as much to that and as easily to that as if you were in pain and that, uh, that pleased me about myself. Mmm. Shall we see what they think about it?
  Hmm. Mhm, hmm. So you really would like to find a way of stopping smoking and do I understand there's some particular barrier you feel?
  Mhm, hmm.
   So right here now is one of the situations where you would like to smoke. You're anxious.
  Mhm, hmm. But you're kind of nervous and anxious. Mhm, hmm. Or when somebody is getting after you really . . .
"  So that's a slightly different situation where you're feeling something strongly but feel, ""that I can't express it here.""  And so, a smoke could help you to breathe and get centered and take the place of expressing those feelings? Take the place of crying?"
 So smoking took the place of crying.
  So that's what smoking does for you is help you to breathe when at times you're feeling like you almost can't breathe.
  Sounds you have a lot of knowledge about it: it's just that it doesn't keep you from going back to smoking.
  Mhm, hmm.
  I didn't quite hear what you said.
 Yeah. Uh, huh.
  So this would be a very hard time to be silent for that long.
 At the moment you're very aware of the group. Is that what you're saying?
 Mhm, hmm. I'm just aware of you.
  Mhm, hmm. When you're with yourself and with me  that feels okay.  It's when you realize that there's all these people . . .
" ""What am I supposed to do?"" ""What do they expect of me?""  "
  Between the two of us there's a calmness.  Your breathing is okay.  In you as well as in me?  Mhm, hmm. 
 Mhm, hmm. We can be calm together and calm separately.  And, and each of us breathing okay.
  I didn't quite hear you.
  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. There is a nervousness there and you're legs are just . . .
 The breathing's okay.
 Hmm?
 You feel fluttering? 
  Mhm, hmm. Another jerk.  Can you say what those jerks mean to you?
  Mhm, hmm. Your body is just doing something that's out of your control.
  But it just happens without your knowing why.
 Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. You don't quite understand what happens when your body is,  goes . . .
 Yeah. Can you say some of things that are racing around up there? 
  Uh, huh. So, are you being stupid or having a seizure or what in the world is going on? You keep asking yourself.
  Sort of critical of yourself?
"  Mhm, hmm. But part of you is saying, ""Now stop it, it's stupid. This is ridiculous."" And another part of you is saying, ""Wait a minute. My body is doing something, if I can go with it, maybe I can learn something."""
  Mhm, hmm. But you feel as though, perhaps your body is trying to teach you something but you don't know what it is.
  .
  Mhm, hmm. It definitely makes you feel embarrassed. Uh, huh. It's embarrassing to me  or to you  or the group or . . . ?
  I certainly hope I'm not embarrassing you.
"  Sounds that a lot of the time you're in the position of watching yourself and you're saying, uh, ""Now what you're doing is not good. It's not really right. n"
"  Mhm, hmm. There are two very real parts of you and one is that you judge and say, ""This is stupid. Don't do that. It's embarrassing. It's not good."" And then you say, ""Well wait a minute . . . what is my body trying to tell me? What is it trying to tell me?""   . "
"   Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. ""There's something that wants to get out."""
  Uh, huh. Uh, huh. Uh, huh. There is something that wants to get out but what it is you have no idea. But it wants to get out bad enough that you're shaking all over.
  
"  And that's one of the other judgements, ""that this is, this is just comical. It's a comedy.""  But I think the other part of you is saying, ""That's no comedy."""
  Hmm?
  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm.
  Mhm, hmm. It would be nice to put the parts together,  . .   Shaking . . . .
  Something so much wants to come out.  You want to hold my hands? 
 Do you think it will help it to come out?
  A little scared. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. There's something very scary that's going on inside.
  I think that's why I wanted to hold your hands to see if it's safe enough to come out. But all your nerves are scared.
 What's the awful thing that could happen?
 Ah, yes.
  Uh, huh. Uh, huh. That everything inside of you is worse than you thought.
 It's terrible. Um.
  Mhm, hmm. Yeah. It's really something very awful. Very frightening.
 Can you see what else is racing around inside?
  Mhm, hmm.
  Mhm, hmm. -
  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm.  She's feeling very much with you. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm.
 You're pretty close to sobs that you can . . .
  Hmm?
 Your ears are hot?  Uh, huh.
 You're worried about her?
 Don't be worried about her. Some people are taking care of her.  Just you. Let the tears come.  Let it come.    
 A choking feeling. Uh, huh. Uh, huh. Uh, huh. You can't breathe. You can't hardly breathe. Is that what's so scary?
 You don't know. It seems you have that choking feeling as if you can't breathe. You can't breathe.  
  When you let go and just cry does it come out?  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm.  You can't breathe?
   Choking. Mhm, hmm. Just can't breathe at all. It's terrible.
   Mhm, hmm. You choke.
   A lot of people are feeling with you.
    Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm.
  You just feel like sobbing  and choking,  and shaking . . .
 Afraid.  Afraid you'll choke?
 You don't know what. But just afraid. But just a very scary moment.  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. You're living through a lot of fear. It's just so frightening. It makes you shake all over.
 Just scared.
  The fear comes and goes. I see. The body shaking goes on and on. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Hmm.
  It gets you tired. Uh, huh. I should think so. Shaking, shaking, shaking. The fear coming and going.
  Your head's spinning?
  Dizzy. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Hmm. What does the fear seem to be of? Fear of choking, fear of convulsions? What is the fear about, do you have a clue?
"  What is all this about, I see. ""What in the world is my body doing to me?""  Mhm, hmm. ""What is it about?"" Hmm. "
  Mhm, hmm.
 Uh, huh. Uh, huh. Mhm, hmm. Part of you feels really in tune with it in some way and wants to go on.
 Hmm. Hmm.  Tired. Really tired. Mhm, hmm. You wish you could give yourself a little rest.
  Umm, what . . .
  Well, what do you want to do?
  Do you want to open your mouth and shout for a while,  I don't know what else . . . what would feel good?  Would you like to sit on my lap?
   Hmm? You're okay?
  Something isn't . . .  hmm?
" Part of it's, part of it's weeping and part of it's fear . . . You really want it out. ""Come out,"" huh?"
 So tired. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. You've just had about all you can take. And your body feels it.
 Ohh.
  Dizzy. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Alright. 
  Do your legs feel okay? Mhm, hmm.  I feel as though we've been through quite a lot together.
  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm.   Do you think we can bring it to a close?
  I don't either. I know that it's fear and it's choking and it's weeping and sobbing. It's scary as hell.    
  Mhm, hmm. You can see it. It's as if you were born again.
  Does mine?
 Does your's? Mhm, hmm.
 Hmm?
   I didn't feel shaking inside myself, I could feel your shaking. Mhm, hmm.    How about we rest for a minute? Let's see. Do you mind if I say a little about how it seemed to me?
   I felt what happened was somewhat of a surprise to you and it certainly was a complete surprise to me. I felt sure, I felt very good about the silence because I felt they were your silences. I was sure things must be going on, and I thought I said that too, but I didn't need to know them. And uh, I just felt we were very much in touch somehow. And it isn't anything planful but I just felt that when you were going through so much I wondered if it would help to hold your hands and I'm not sure whether it did or not. And uh, I'm sorry it couldn't come out now whatever it is. Maybe it's a number of things. I hope sometime it can come out. I wish you could, if we get a chance to work together more it might help bring that out. Uh, I thought it was a bit unusual, I think for lots of people talk quite a lot. You didn't talk quite a lot but your body showed a great deal and I felt very responsive to that.
  Mmm, hmm. Feeling tense?
  Mhm, hmm.
  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. It helped you because- you've been a little jumpy . . .
 Mhm, hmm.
  You were a bit surprised that I would see you a second time.
  So you create the expectations and you're trying to be wherever you are.         starts at the beginning .      Is there any way of saying what that means to you?
  But it does seem like a lot of power. Power that's coming out of that tension. 
  Fear.
  Mhm, hmm.
"  Mhm, hmm. ""It really seems absurd. What, what is it I'm afraid of?""  What is the worst that could happen?"
  Oh. The worst thing that could happen would be that you would go on behaving in this way and not have any explanation of it for others or any explanation of it for yourself?
  Both. -
  Okay. Okay.
  Even though it's a good experience that doesn't need explanation. For other people they might need  or something.  But for you right now it's good and it's experiencing power.
  What goes on from time to time you feel like saying something but nothing comes out, is that right?
"  Mhm, hmm. So, ""whatever it is that's got a hold of me, it's okay. It's good. ."
  Mhm, hmm.
  Would it help to hold my hand or would it make any difference?
  It really takes over you.
" ""I do not understand."" Mhm, hum."
 Something wants to come out.
  .
  Hmm?
  You don't understand it. Mhm, hmm. You don't know what's going on.
  You're retching. Uh, huh.
  Mhm, hmm. It's a really strange experience because you feel calm but then you're also coughing up something.  retching .       You go through it and then a calmness.
  Mhm, hmm . . . some kind of power surging through you sort of?  It's hard to figure, it's strong and it's good yet, it's retching and vomiting.
  Uh, huh.
  Mhm, hmm. After the retching you become real calm . . . then your stomach isn't in a knot.
  Mhm, hmm.
"  Mhm, hmm. ""What is this thing going on in me? I'd really like to understand it, know what it's about, know what it's for."" Mhm, hmm. ""All I know now is it's powerful, it's like a surge of electricity. It's retching. It's a calm."
  Mhm, hmm. It's a healthy feeling of blood coursing through your veins. Mhm, hmm . . . it must be okay, thoughts running around in your mind.
  Hmm?
"  ""What is this about?"""
"  Uh, huh. You're trying to be as open to the experience as you can be. ""I don't want to push anything down or keep anything from coming up. The same thoughts keep running and running around. What is this about? What does it have to do with me?"""
  A little bit of fear?
"  To go through it. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. ""Whatever this is I really want to live through it. I want to experience it. I want to feel it. I want to be in it."""
  Your heart racing, uh, huh. Sounds like something that clings hold of you but you let it cling hold of you.
 Hmm?
  Dizzy. Uh, huh. Sort of lightheaded, mhm, hmm. Feeling as though you might faint.
  Your head's spinning around and around and around. A really dizzy feeling.
  Mhm, hmm. 
  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. 
  .
  Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Hmm. Hmm.                There are tears now.  Mhm, hmm. So now you want to weep. You better let 'em out. You're letting out tears and you're shaking . . . they're right there.
 It's right there.
  Hmm? Your throat is tight. It's right in your throat. You feel as though you're coughing up something? 
  Hhm, hmm. It's so .
  I see our time is about up. -
  It seems very mysterious to you. You've experienced energy you don't quite understand. Is it okay to stop?
  I feel very glad we had this second time  a chance to go through it again.  I feel mystified about it too. 
  That's okay. It's something to be experienced  This time I was more aware of the fact that she was shaking too. Was she a good friend of yours? Uh, huh.
   last time. I thought maybe there was some connection (Inaudible.
   So was I  but suddenly it occurred to me, maybe that's part of it.
 Maybe she should be the client.   
  I’m...I’m really pleased to know that... that you... you’re not professional, you’re just...You’re just a person. .
  That was something that really touched you where you live.
  So that if you had it to do all over again, you might do it differently.
  Right now you’re living with certain regrets, not for what you’ve done, but for what you haven’t done and haven’t been. That’s like I get it.
  That’s one aspect in which you do feel not only regret, but maybe a little ashamed or something, that you’ve, uh, used them as an excuse for not meeting life on a more daring basis.
  I guess that feeling is really...really stops you, that it’s just too late to begin to live.
  M-hm. So there are two sides to it too.
  You feel that’s what you need, is help from outside to get out into that current of life.
  M-hm. So to you that’s not a new problem that...
  That was quite a strong statement, that you never have been able to do anything by yourself.
  But not on your own initiative.
  Like What you’re asking is, “Give me a push”, or “pull me.”
  M-hm. m-hm. You’d like so much to continue that same pattern that’s been your life all through--right here.
  Even here. Right now in this moment.
  This...this taste is very tempting, and it would be a way of keeping young.
  So by coming here you’ve already taken a step.
  You’ve taken two steps. 
  No, ‘cause calling her and saying, “I can do it”, is a second step.
  Okay
  No, you can keep quiet as long as you wish.
  Your...your whole life is really a way of asking people, “Please take the lead.”
  “ Why, why didn’t she lead me into school and into other things?”  And that’s one side of it, and the other side of it is, “I really have grown more than she has. She’s a little old lady.”
  --and I’m not.”
  M-hm. That was a time when you felt good about yourself.
  M-hm. That really is your search, isn’t it? To...to retain that twenty year old feeling by doing new things.
  Uh-huh. uh-huh. uh-huh.  That says it so well. 
  Not only lovely, but it’s setting a model for them, isn’t it?
  And you’re not sure whether you can accept that part of yourself that wants to relax and be tired and be sixty-nine.
  You feel that to be doing both risky things and being sixty-nine and relaxing--that double thing, is not a good model for them?
  Mmmm. You think you should always be strong and risking and daring and...
  You’d settle for fifty/fifty.
  It was a risk before it happened, but not now.
  M-hm.  You went from one loving home to another loving home, and that’s been it.
  Until recently, and now she’s been taking risks.
  The Chinese have a saying: “A journey of a thousand miles starts with one step.”
  M-hm. It’s not that you’ve never experienced them, but it seems though now you’re in the spectator role.
  It seems to me you’re, you're having a number of feelings right now. You’re...you felt frightened; you still realize you are frightened underneath.   You’re risking; you’re feeling comfortable. All kinds of different feelings  right here.
  And you scold yourself a little for that?
  And right now there’s nothing there  for you to examine.
  M-hm. You really aren’t good enough to be here.
  You’re sure a professional would do the job better of being a client. 
  That’s it--you feel you must put on a show.
  Yeah. That...that’s not a new feeling for you to feel,  “I’m not really good enough for this situation. I’m not contributing enough. I’m not...”  “... feeling enough. I’m not risking enough.”
  So that in those moments you...you feel, “I’m really not worth very much.”
  But there is a large part of you that feels, “No, I’m not really much.”
  That’s one of the most tiring things I know.
  So that even when you’re depressed you give other people a feeling that things are fine.
  I don’t know whether it will help you any or not, but...I don’t have any friends my age. I can’t stand ‘em. 
  M-hm.  That sounds sort of like a...a resolution about a new kind of life.
  Yeah, the contrast that you gave of the picture of yourself getting up late, dawdling two hours over coffee and wondering how you could spend the time until eight o’clock in the evening is very different from the woman I am talking to now.
  It was very good. I think we’re going to have to stop in a couple of minutes. Is there anything more you wanted to say?
  I feel it’s been a privilege to see a...an older person who is young. And I...I’ll change my statement of a moment ago when I said “I...I didn’t have any friends my age.” I do have one or two, but they’re young people  in heart. M-hm. It’s been nice talking with you.
   No, sit, sit still because...we’ll, we’ll probably...I think that probably.... the group would like to know, after you've thought a minute or two about it how you felt about this and then uh I’ll tell how I saw it and  we’ll, then we’ll let them in on it.
  Well, I think uh... This has been a delightful picture of someone who’s going to live young. And, uh...I realize it was different from what I might have expected. Um...I guess you were...you were asked if you would be a client. Is that right?
  Uh-huh. That um, that’s one reason why you had a hard time finding things to talk about at times. Uh,where I guess usually before, uh, someone has asked who would, who would volunteer to be a client and so that’s usually someone with a problem. But it’s...
  I thinkif I'm getting ityou feel within yourself you're a nice guy. It's the attitudes that other people have toward you that disturb you. Is that right?  So that within yourself the nasty jobs you have to do are OK with you. It's simply that others see you as a representative of an evil system.
 Yes, I do.
" Two things you said that really hit meseveral things. You are hurt by some of these attitudes toward you. You're also raising the question, ""Who am I really, in this system?"""
"  And then you feel that you have your very desperate problems too, and realize how easily you could be attacked and criticized, just as the police are attacked and criticized. But you feel mostly, ""Who am I and what am I trying to accomplish?"""
" I appreciate that. And I also appreciate the fear as I hear it, that ""Suppose someday I wake up and I'm on the defeated end of the scalewhat am I going to feel? What's it like to be in a bunker in the last days? It would be a disaster. And what will I do, what will I feel? What will I feel about myself?"""
 Yeah.
  So that outside you see that you belong to a rotten system. Inside it seems quite different to you.
    And which of those views are you going to hold, which are you going to stand by?
" I do see. You've lost contact with your own subculture, and that makes you wonder again, ""What's the right thing to do? What do I believe?""  It is a real dilemma."
" There was almost a note of sadness when you said, ""I've got to be a facade.""  You know the person that lives inside that facade, but you don't know that anyone else will really appreciate that person perhaps."
 And you feel you have to play a role.
 That the role you play is something different from the person you are.
 If you were really yourself, who knows what would happen.
 People might think you're an oddball, or I don't know what.
 So maybe your facade is more transparent.
" That's comforting because you feel, ""Maybe I could be the real me, because my friends seem to see the real me anyway."""
" I wasn't quite sure whether you were saying, ""So the national situationthe black/white situationthat's really not where I live."" And then suddenly you raise the question, ""Or maybe it is."""
 You can see that in the lives of your clients: They have to decide how to be themselves, how to form the delicate relationship with the outside world.
  So maybe you have to kind of grit your teeth and stick it out, even though it's a bad, rough world.
" Well, I understand that. You're sounding as though for the moment you're accepting your lot: ""Yeah, this is a rough, lousy world, but there I am in it I didn't choose to be here at this time and place."""
 In a sense you feel that history is looking over your shoulder, and you're going to be either the bad guy or the good guy.
 Maybe within the world of your own interpersonal relations.
 You can be the person you are.
" I understand that. Maybe what others think or the opinions even of history are less important than ""What am I able to do, what kind of a person am I able to be within the circle that I really influence?"""
 So you feel you're sort of a social leper.
 It's quite something to have people just walk away from you as though they didn't even want to have anything to do with you.
 So if worse comes to worst, you won't be rewarded for being a nice guy.
 That message is really coming throughthat you are living out a way of being that may be quite different from the way you usuallyyou really are inside.
" I do. And it feelsafter looking at the other side it makes it worse within yourself. You feel, ""I'm not a bad person."""
 Hmm?
 No!  It can be up whenever you want it to be up.
 I think you've partly answered this, but I'll ask it once more, because I'm trying to get a feeling for what it's like to know that you're living a role that is really not you.  Sounds as though it must be quite tough inside, as I've heard you mention.
 Yes, I can really
" No, I adopt a somewhat different solution from you, but my problem is different. I feel, to hell with those who want to say: ""Ah well, here's Carl Rogers."" I'm just Carl.  I would prefer to be me, to be the person I am."
 That's for me, in my situation.
 Yeah.
 I hear you.
 And the problem which you seem to have raised in the interview: can you tell yourself to be you?
 Yeah, it mixes one up.
  No. 
 Why? There are very definite reasons. Because the summary that might exist in me is not important in the least. The summary that exists in you is what's important. That doesn't mean that you have to give a summary. I just mean that what the experience means to you is the important thing, not some words that I could say about it.
  In what way are you feeling worse? I’m not quite clear.
  Things that you really have just put aside and not felt about have come pretty close to the surface , and it doesn't feel good. 
  Umhmm.  We probably should come to a stop, but I don't want to rush either of us.
 So maybe symbolically you're dropping your role and-
 Being you.
 That's clear to me.
     Uhm, hmm.
     Uhm, hmm.
     Uhm, hmm.
     Uhm, hmm.
     Sounds like you cleared away a lot of the rubbish.  Now, what are you going to build there?
     Yeah, mmm.
     Uhm, hmm.
     They might not understand because whatever you're after is something that perhaps other people aren't trying for, that they wouldn't really recognize what it is you're, you're trying to do for yourself.
     Uhm, hmm Uhm, hmm So whatever you're trying to create, there really is no model for that. It's something, something different.
      Yes.
   Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
       But you feel as though something is sort of holding you back from getting started? Is that...? 
  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.  And you're not quite sure whether you want to be in this crazy world.
  Uhm, hmm.
       So, “What, what is the way that I want to be of service in this world, strange and bizarre as it is?”
      Mmm, mmm..
      You want to be close to your inner truth, whatever it is.
  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm..
  Uhm, hmm.. So to creep out into the world, that's a very dangerous procedure because you're vulnerable.  You might be squashed.  It's frightening.
  Uhm, hmm.. I, I got a sense that you feel uh, kind of alone in that, not at all sure that anyone else would value what, what you might see as the way you want to be. 
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
 But I guess there is a real question, “Does this world have any place for me?  For somebody that's solitary, that's different?”  
 I don’t know whether I'm hearing that correctly, but it sounds as though you feel, “I've got to somehow fit their concepts of what I should be.”  Or, “I've got to fit in somehow.”
 So that you're quite sure there's no room really for the real you.  You’ve got to modify that a little bit to fit what people expect.
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. So, it sounds like to me a very real feeling that you're not quite sure there is any place for the real you.  You've got to shape it a little bit and fix it a little to fit what other people are looking for, or could understand.
  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. So you don’t --
  Uhm, hmm..
  Uhm, hmm.. So there's no...
  Uhm, hmm.
 So there's no question about the strength of the inner power that you have.  That, that you're sure of.  But to let it out in its imperfect state, “Wow, that's dangerous.”
  Uhm, hmm.. Because it's so powerful?
      I see.
       Not, not only imperfect in itself, it might have imperfect consequences.  It might harm or not really be always helpful.
  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm..
      Uhm, hmm. I get a sense of that, that you're, you're a reservoir of enough power that, that means that, “God, what does it mean? It could be dangerous. It could be hurtful. It could be marvelous, but, but it's not perfect.”
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
   Uhm, hmm.
 So it might come out pure and, and really what it is, “But my gosh, that might be, that might be a witch.”
      A witch would be condemned by everybody.
      Or a lot of people.
  Uhm, hmm, uhm, hmm. You might in some very real sense be condemned to death for being the power that you are.
       That they're what?
  Uhm, hmm.
"       Part of, part of the real block is, ""If I let my power loose into the world, I might be killed for that"" "
       Yeah, O.K. Something terrible.
  Uhm, hmm.. “It might lead to some terrible fate for me.” 
  Uhm, hmm, uhm, hmm.
       “How could it be that the real true inner me could have such awful fateful consequences,” perhaps?  “Could that really be?”  That seems a real puzzle.
       Yeah.
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
      You really love yourself, rooted in the earth and reaching to the sky.
 And very large and very whole.
  Uhm, hmm, uhm, hmm.
 And, and this would be being confident with yourself?
 At one with, uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
 So on the on the spiritual level it seems O.K.  Really you're, you're pleased with yourself.
       But on the religious level...
       Yeah, uhm, hmm, the religious spiritual level that comes from the outside.
       That seams, “Oh wow.”
       Beginning of time?
  Uhm, hmm.  So that in some sense...
  Uhm, hmm.  From the beginning of time you feel there's been this split in you between the...
       ...the real spiritual essence of you.
       Which is really O.K.  And the religious spiritual um, ethos of the, of the time which is bad, wrong.
   Uhm, hmm.
   Uhm, hmm. You feel that...
       You feel sort of doomed that, that uh, this expansive real inner you has not and never will fit into the world as it is.
       O.K. Has not and does not fit into the world as it is.
   Uhm, hmm.
  But you haven't given up hope.
       It might fit.
  Uhm, hmm.  The idea of sort of, the image that comes to my mind, sort of shaving off parts of yourself in order to fit, really doesn't appeal.  You want to be your whole self.
  Uhm, hmm.  That's your gift, that's your uniqueness, you'd like to be that.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
       So the universe really wants you to be that whole person.
       That's putting it too strongly.
  Uhm, hmm.
 Nevertheless, you do feel that it's part of the directive.  Part of the way the universe is constructed, that you might be your whole self and yet...
   Uhm, hmm.  And you've seen it in terms of male and female...
       What is it? As a female you really don't have the right to be that whole self in the universe.
       Oriented.
   Uhm, hmm.
"       The God that has said, ""You're only a woman, you don't really have the right to be fully out there."""
  Some sort of a sigh or something.
  Sort of...
  Sort of a sigh of resignation that, “Yeah, O.K., uh, that's what it is but it's still there, still there.   Still impossible to move out.”
  Uhm, hmm.
  Seems like you can't possibly free yourself from something that is so deep  it's right down to the level of every cell in your body. . That you're not permitted to be out there.
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. Little bit of resignation or even hopelessness.
  Uhm, hmm. “That's the way the universe is. I'll never be able to come out as I am.”
  You're resigned.  You're a little bit hopeless, but still there is something that says, “No, I’m not. I haven't given up.”
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. You don't quite know how to give yourself permission or to, how to create the opportunity, or how to really let yourself loose.
  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
  Sounds like you're saying maybe you sort of have to bypass that feeling that, that you're rejecting the world and the world is rejecting you, that somehow you have to open up to something larger than that.
     Mmm?
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
    I mean it doesn't work, and that maintaining it, somehow I'm maintaining that.
      By,  by resisting, by resisting it being that way. I have an image of a snake.  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
  I was going to say.
  Digesting the whole damn bit, uhm, hmm.. Bones and all.
  Uhm, hmm.  Taking it in, uhm, hmm, right. Uhm, hmm.
  Be-?
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
  Sounds like a pretty healthy snake!
  Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. They tell me your time is about up.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm. It's really a different thing than finding a solution to this conflict. It's a, it's a --
    ...a, like swallowing that thing and moving on.
   Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
  Uhm, hmm.
  Yeah, it's a different, it's a new option or a different alternative or something.
   Uhm, hmm. New model.
  O.K. Uhm, hmm. O.K. to bring it to a close?
  Uhm, hmm.
   Uhm, hmm. Thank you.
   All right, try asking some of them.
   Uh, I guess I would say that, uh, I'm no expert on, uh, occupations.  But uh, yes I have been able sometimes to help people find the kind of goals they want for themselves. Uh, are you saying that that's part of what uh, concerns you--that you're not really sure what direction you want to move?
   You don't know at all where you want to, what direction you want to move or what you want to do.
"   Uhm, hmm.  And I don't, I guess I feel just a trifle puzzled by this notion of your being stuck in ""one little place.""  Wh-, where is this little place?"
   Uhm, hmm.  Kind of a way station between nowhere and nowhere?
   Yeah. Okay. But if you, wherever you are now, you really could work if you had any notion of where you did want to, do, move toward.
  Well, uh, I guess I'd say a couple of things. Uh, you may call yourself a juvenile delinquent.  Uh, I only thought of you as Mike.
  How you help them. I see. Uh, well, I, uh...  The reason I'm slow in answering is that so many things come to mind. Um, I've often tried to help them by giving them a chance to talk out their own purposes and feelings, and so on.
"   That'd knock you down real quick. You feel, ""Boy, that would be no help to me!"""
   Um, you feel that a person couldn't talk about himself unless he already had a goal, is that...
   Hmm.  Well I guess what I meant was that often in talking about their feelings and so on, people find goals they would like to move towards.
   You're kind of skeptical on that though, um, I think.
   Well, uh, let's, let’s talk about it a bit. Uh, you say you have no goal.   None whatsoever.
   There isn't anything you want to do?
   Oh?
   But you do want to keep on living?
   You feel that everybody wants to keep on living?
   Okay, so do I.  And so I'm interested, you say that for you that is one thing--life, life somehow in some way or another seems worth living. Is that what you're saying?
   It somehow has enough possibilities that, uh, you'd give it a chance anyway, or something like that.
   Well, it sure would be a sign he wasn't very happy. Uh, I don't really go very much for this business of  mental trouble, and so on. What I mean is, uh, to me a person seems to be a person. And uh, sure some of them are doing very well and some of them are very unhappy, and so on, but uh ...  
   I ge-, the way I get that is that if you're partly asking that for yourself.  “How could I have a somewhat brighter outlook on life?”
   Uhm, hmm.  It's about 15-watt, maybe or something.
   Maybe 75. Uhm, hmm. Uh, but you wish it were a brighter outlook on life.  In what sense is it dim, can you tell me?
   Family. I don't know whether you'd be willing to tell me about that but I'd be very willing to listen.
"   Uhm, hmm.  So I guess you're saying this is true in general, but it’s also true of you--that your parents try to tell you what to do, and you feel, ""I won't take that."""
   M-hm. I’m, uh, I'm not quite clear there, you say... um... you say it, but you don't really feel it?
"   Uhm, hmm.  Are you saying there, ""She may be able to, uh, make me behave in certain ways or make me do certain things, but she can't control the way I feel, and I let her know how I feel.”"
    So, uh, are you saying that when you stand up on your hind legs strong enough a couple of times in a row, then no matter what she thinks, she kind of gives in to save the broken dishes?
   I see.
   I see.
   Uhm, hmm.  But, uh, part of what really makes for difficulty is the fact that you and your stepfather, as you say, are not, uh, the relationship isn’t completely rosy.
   But that you really hate him and you feel he really hates you.
   You can't speak for sure about his feelings. , cause only he knows exactly what those are, but as far as you're concerned...
   ...you don't have any use for him.
   So for about eight years you've lived with a person whom you have no respect for and really hate.
   There are certain things you respect him for, but that doesn’t, uh, alter the fact that you definitely hate him and don't love him.
   Uhm, hmm.  But you will, uh, you do give him credit for the fact that he’s brave.  He's,  he has guts or something.
   Uhm, hmm.  So I guess you're saying he really has, um…
   Quite a few.  Yeah.  He has what it takes, in quite a few ways, and a number of good qualities.  But, uh, that doesn’t, uh, mean that you care for him at all,    quite the reverse.
   Uhm, hmm.    If it weren't for her, you feel you'd just, wouldn't stand it.
   Uhm, hmm.  So between the feelings of hate that you have, and the, and the temper that he has,     you feel that if there were just the two of you uh, boy that would blow up in nothing flat.
   Uhm, hmm.  Blow up in little pieces.
   Sounds as if you feel a little scorn about the attitude he has toward modern life.  And as far as his, uh, desire for you to be a machinist, well, that just doesn't fit what you want to do, and you're opposed on that.
"   You feel, ""This is the last thing that I would want to do."""
   Um, that bad.   That rather than be what he wants you to be,     or rather than be a metalworker...
   I see.
"   So you feel it's not, it's not just resistance against him.  You feel ""I just don't like that kind of work. I, I hate it so that I'd rather be dead than do that."""
   Sounds as if you feel you're all thumbs in that kind of thing.
   Butter. 
   Getting under your skin.
   Sounds as though he really had gotten under your skin.
   M-hm. Sounds like a real festering, simmering...
   ...hatred. Hmm? What did you say?
   Bubble?
   Well, I guess I like your word better, it’s kind of a, kind of a boiling, pot, that's been boiling and bubbling.
   Uhm, hmm. This steam is just gonna blow the lid pretty quick.
   If you ever really blow your top with your stepfather, that's gonna be the end.
   Ah, he, he’ll, he would give you up, sorta then.
   I guess I get the impression you're saying, “He would just coldly kick me out.”
   I'm trying to sort of let it soak in what I hear in your voice.  And that too, 'cause uh, I don't know, sounds though you feel kind of cold on that too. Am I right?
   Nobody’s gonna push you around, huh?
   I guess, I guess you're saying that all the strength you've got, “Not my stepfather nor my mother nor anybody is going to boss me around and tell me what to do.”
   No?
   All right. Uh, okay, I see. I see.  Okay.  It isn't,    a general thing that it's, it's just that they are not gonna boss me as to what I'm going to do about going into the service.
   But you're not saying that, uh, in general, are you? You’re not saying that.
"   So you're saying, ""In some things, uh, I would want to keep on the good side of them, I would want to be reasonable, uh, but there's some things that I feel are my choice, and by George, I'm gonna stick to those."""
   If you don't stick to your choice then you’re just...
   Yeah, I sort of get the feeling you're saying there...
   “These decisions that I feel are mine, that's my ship.  And if I ever, uh, let go of that I'd really sink or I'd be a ship without a rudder.  I really wouldn't, uh,    I wouldn't, have anything.”
"   Uhm, hmm.  I get the feeling you're saying, ""If I gave up on that, I would be giving up myself, kind of.”    And you're saying, “I have no intention of doing that."" So maybe sometimes you're a little bit scared you might?"
   I see. I see. But if it’s regular, you mean a lot of this difference that you have with your parents well, you feel that’s, it happens to everybody, that’s regular. Is that what you mean?     But as far as despising your stepfather is concerned,   that’s an extra part of your situation.
   Then I can't quite tell from your description of that what your feeling is about it, but when you stepped up to him and said...
   Uhm, hmm. This was, this was really a knock-down-drag-out fight in everything except the fists, huh?
   And I noticed that as you think about that, uh, scrap, you can't help but smile too.
"   Uhm, hmm. So that even though this was, uh, from, probably from your mother's point of view or any observer's point of view a pretty knock-down-drag-out fight, yet you feel really, ""That brought me and my stepfather a little closer together, because I said what I felt and he maybe   heard it.  And he said some things that he felt, and I really understood some of them too."""
"   Uhm, hmm.  So that, uh, I get a real note of softness when you say that. That you, you realize, ""Well, he never has had any children all his life, and that is probably that is fairly rough on him, trying to, uh, live with a teenage boy."
   Boys.
   I see.     He all of a sudden walked into a whole family.
   Then you feel you were somehow really left in the gap. Your older brother he liked, because he was going to be a machinist, and he took to him anyway.    Your sister--it's nice to have a girl, that he liked well.  And that left you nowhere.
   And a little brother, too.
   Kind of behind the eight ball, I guess.
   You're way out in cold outer space.
   But, but you feel one reason that uh, you think, “One reason that I wouldn't leave home is that probably he would like it if I left.    So I won't.”
   There's a real hot wind blowing most of the time, hmm? And it isn't political either.
   You feel that whatever progress you might make would be pretty small, because you don't think he really wants to understand you.  And you're darn sure, that, uh, you're not enough interested in him to want to understand him.
   So you think it, it couldn't really work out.
   Uhm, hmm. Then you also feel you're living with a spoiled child who's always had his own way and who managed to have most of his own way during the army, too. And, uh,    so you're living in a one man Army with a spoiled-child general. Is that what you're saying?
   Spoiled brat then.
   Uhm, hmm. So, “He may try to buy my love but that doesn't work.”
"   You say, ""I'm not about to be bought."" and you feel, ""When I told him,    that, I hurt him, but uh..."
   You're free.  That’s it.
   Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  I see.    You feel that if he loves you, he'd show that in different ways.  It wouldn't be through buying scooters or anything else.
"   So you feel that there are a lot of circumstances probably that led to your getting the scooter, and you safely think it might be possible that there was a little bit of love on his part in it, but then you think, ""No, I don't think so.”"
   You're just not sure whether, whether it was just an attempt to buy you, or whether maybe there was a small bit of, of affection in it.
   Uhm, hmm. You realize you don't know and you can't be sure of his feelings.  It's conceivable that it had some section in it that you don't know.    You can't read his mind and you don't know his feelings. Don't know whether he feels any affection toward you, or not.
   Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  But this the latest uh, go-round you've had with him, with, in regard to what you would do next, hmm? Whether you would be a mechanic and on that you're darn sure what the answer is.  Or whether you should go into the services, and uh, there,   you feel, maybe some of his thinking is sound, you're just not sure.
   You're afraid that he'll, his long arm might reach out even into the services and make you be a mechanic.
  Just don't want to take the chance that he might somehow influence your navy career and make you a mechanic in spite of yourself and that's a fate worse than death, huh?
  These people and probably most people wouldn't ever be able to understand the fact that you just despise the whole ...
  ...occupation of mechanics.
 You just feel disgusted with the whole damned enterprise.
   I felt that was what you felt anyway.
 You'd get it on left-handed some way or another.
 I see I'm going to have to stop in a few minutes. Uh, I don't know whether there’s more you want to say or ...
 Okay. Uh, I guess I feel very appreciative really that you've been willing to share this much of yourself with me.  And uh, I know as well as you do that, uh, there aren't any quick and easy answers to a lot of these things. But, uh, I really do hope that you'll be able to make choices in directions that will have some satisfaction for you. And I’ll even hope that maybe you can uh, find some ways of living a little more comfortably with your stepfather.  But, uh...
 You feel that I'm an incurable optimist if I hope that.
 That, that would be an invention!
 Uhm, hmm.  Well, I guess you sound a little skeptical. I'm not sure you would take the pill even if it … 
    That would be really a bitter pill to swallow, wouldn't it?
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. So there was a truce for a while, and it even seemed as though things were a little bit better.  But, uh, war has now been declared again. Hmm.
 No.
 Okay.
 You can’t say it. I'll say it. They aren't worth a damn. Is that what you want to say?
 I would, I would just bet that a lot of these people think that's the best speech they've heard in a long, long time.  
 Okay.
 Nice getting acquainted with you.
 Good luck to you.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. Frightened of me, or frightened of the situation, or both?
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. You have to make yourself come forward to meet. Mhm, mhm.
"  Mhm. It's alright to go a little ways in meeting them, but there's some point where you feel, ""No! Now we would really meet if we went any further. I prefer to run away."""
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. But the block is not in me...  But if you go too far, you'll reveal something of you. Mhm, mhm.
  They’re touching that secret part of you that you don't quite know what it is.
  Mhm., mhm.
  That you feel whatever this is, that is sort of frightening within... is a negative feeling, the pain and hurt and, possibly, anger.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. That if you ever let yourself really live in or feel those feelings, maybe you'd never find your way back to pleasantness and happiness and joy.
  Makes you wonder whether, maybe the joy would be more real if you were able to explore some of those frightening feelings.  But they are scary.
  Mhm, mhm. Resentment and hurt and everything like that. You’ve kept it pushed down for a long, long time.
  You kind of talk it all away and explain why you shouldn't really feel those feelings, as if they're not necessary. And, uh... and you shouldn't feel them in relation to the person who caused them.
  Mhm, mhm. Certainly you can't feel any blame for that person . It must be you.
  And yet, somehow, you know you do feel that resentment and hurt. And you know the person that it's directed toward.
  But it's safer to keep it in a box, and yet you know very well that you do feel it. That you're scared if you feel it then what? You never get rid of it.
  So you know it's your mother mostly and you know the feelings that were stirred up were stirred up a long, long time ago. But, how you can work through those, that you're not quite clear.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. Again, you can explain it away that there are reasons and so on and it's okay, but you've never been able to let her see the hurt and pain that is in you, and somehow that keeps you from being all of you.
  Mhm, mhm. You have to be careful of her.
  That's your daily task is to push them down, push them down, push them down and be somebody who isn't quite real.
  You see it all very clearly, but to try to get in touch with or to express those feelings of hurt and resentment, that's where you can't do it.  
  A good feeling to let out a little bit of it even though you exaggerate the situation in order to feel that resentment.   It lets out a little of the resentment from the past.
  And you're quite, quite ingenious   in finding ways of expressing bits of it.
  I don't know what that shaking of your head means, but it looks like your saying, “It isn't possible.”
  It's got to come out so carefully that it doesn't blame anybody or, anything. You can't just let it out.
   So it's quite possible that it's okay to be unreasonable and irrational even, and spill things that aren't quite right because then you might be able to make it okay afterwards once they were out.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. Mhm, rnhm. That childhood experience of being shuttled around and not really considered in the situation. Uh... as a result of it, you not being able to consider and take care of yourself.  And you must have felt very keenly the business of being, sounds like, treated as an object, just put here, put there, and not really, not really considered, not really cared about.
  Mhm, mhm. Don’t have any undue show of emotion. You've got to be polite and   proper.
  “Don't cry. Be a big girl.”
  But when the tears were dropping, it was the four year old feeling very hurt.
  And angry at them. Can you say that? Then I thought maybe not. Angry too, um-hmm. “Damn you! Why don't you consider me?”
  So don't feel those feelings, there were reasons for your mother's actions and so on.  Mhm, mhm. Mustn't feel any of those feelings.
  “Okay, you didn't hurt me.”  It's not true, but still it feels like you must be a good mother to her.
"  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. ""Why do I have to be her mother?"""
  It's scary to let yourself down into those feelings. You might not be able to get out.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. You almost feel ashamed of that, but you do feel sorry for yourself.  You realize that, “I went through a hell of a lot.”   “I really do feel pity for myself.”
  You just don't feel things like that. You should think about other people.  And there's a good lesson in sitting on your feelings.
  You learned it all too well.
  A strong lesson.
  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. It's not quite so frightening because you realize, “Yes, I am in touch with them and they aren't overwhelming, but they're coming out little by little.”
  You wish what? I'm sorry.
  You feel that this is a fairly safe place and that I'm a fairly safe person to explore them with.
  And you'd like to get out more of it. This other was a hurt and anger about being shuttled back and forth, and there's the suppression in the Convent and orphanage… um-hmm.  But there are others.
  There's a lot more.
  But for the moment, they don't seem quite so scary.
  Mhm, mhm. It's really good to have that fear lessened a little where  when it's really stopped you from so many things.
"  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. ""What's the big deal? What's the big crime in saying, ‘I'm hurt. I am hurting.’ Why does that seem so hard?”  Um..."
"  Mhm, mhm. Mhm, mhm. ""What's the big deal? What's the big crime in saying, ‘I'm hurt. I am hurting.’ Why does that seem so hard?”  Um..."
  Mhm. Mhm, mhm.  Trying to be someone that you were not.
  Mhm, mhm. You want to try to be what they would like and not consider you.
  Mhm, mhm. You think you'll be you for a while? Is that what you said?
  Mhm, mhm. It might be a good experiment, huh?
  Really consider yourself and be yourself and not just try to be what other people want you to be.    We're going to have to stop in a couple minutes. Is that okay?  Okay to stop now?
  Good. 
Maybe if I accepted the fact that I... need and must have limits here, and set them... then I wouldn't feel so hostile. 
 Sort of that you haven't had any protection for yourself, or any feeling that you had any right to such protection...  If somebody demands something, you must give, that's all. 
 So that even though it seems so... giving and so reasonable and everything... actually it involves a pretty... almost egotistical feeling about yourself, that you're able to be responsible for so much and that you can give everything that's demanded and so on. 
 Just feels like a lifting of a considerable burden if I feel I could...  I could select the things I can do and want to do.  I don't have to do everything that's asked .  Not even everything that I demand of myself.
 That is, if I get what you mean there, I think probably it isn't so much a matter of planning but just when... something comes up... you'll have the feeling, well, this is more than I can do, or more than I want to do, or something.  Is that...?
 You'd like to be aware of your feelings about these demands right at the time they happen... instead of having... bright thoughts afterwards.
 But you're quite sure you often do feel a good deal of... anger... both in regard to this and perhaps in other ways and... you wish you could get more to the roots of that .  
 But you realize that... even though you don't see a reason for it in your background... still quite often your feeling is 'Oh, these women'!    Quite annoyed with.
 Sort of feeling that... women in general or women as a group  oh, nuts to them.  ...  
 Mhm...  So it's kind of nice to be able to say, 'Yes, I like men'...  And I guess at first your reaction is, 'And I really shouldn't... dislike women', but then when you think of some of these situations you feel... 'Augh'!    
 It's here - these two kinds of contradictory feelings, 'I like some women very much, and I feel... very annoyed at... women in general, now what do I do about that'? 
 But you feel sort of drawn toward the question of... 'Why do I feel this way'?  
 Almost feel as though all those... mixed feelings of anger for your grandmother, and sorrow for her, and feeling kind of worried about and responsible for your mother... almost robbed you of any real childhood.  ...
 But you feel that there is perhaps sort of an undercurrent of resentment toward her on the basis of... why didn't she settle this thing or why didn't she... set limits as to... how submissive she will be or something?  ...  It could be -¬†can we summarize that¬†- why didn't she handle it like an adult?...   I don't know...
 Am I getting this right, that you felt if he... dropped out of the situation, then, then, it would just be a complete mess.  Nobody would be able to handle things?
 But you feel that all along and to some extent even now... you would like so much to have him... care for you.  And that that governs... a number of the things you do.
 Would this be putting it right?   That... you're saying that... perhaps he does care, but at least all that gets through to you... is words about caring... and demands on you.   
 Just a hopeless feeling that I can't possibly meet his expectations or demands...
 Looks as though that just makes you feel tired right now, just to think of this endless chain of... insatiable demands.   
 That's another one of the feelings that you hold against women.   Here she... just gave in to all his demands for service and help. 
 Feel that if she had been able to say within herself... 'I'll go this far but no further'...  Well it probably would have been all right ...
 So that in a sense you feel, 'here I am... following in the same kind of  pattern that she set?' ...
 Guess you're saying, 'I really don't respect her for the way she just kept trying to meet all the demands?'  
 Sort of really contradictory, first to be feeling, 'I don't want to...  I don't want to be a person who just... gives in to all demands'.  And yet feeling... that's the only chance I have of being loved. 
 Who really would love a... doormat?  ...
 I guess you're saying that to some degree, 'I do blame her for not coping better with my grandmother, and for not... not being more of a person in her own right'. 
 Guess you're saying there, 'I really don't like the weakness in my mother'.
 You just wish she hadn't... felt so obligated to do everything, and wish she could have relaxed a little more...and have really been in relationship with you.    
 But even though it's factually impossible, the feeling was... 'Gee, I miss her, I wish she was here to take care of me and look after me'. ... 
 You really didn't feel sure in yourself whether... what you wanted was someone to really... give you close mothering... or whether you wanted some more... grown up kind of relationship...
 Maybe it's just hopeless to wish that I could really be in a relationship with anybody...  Maybe I have to be alone.
 HmHm...  You feel if it's really something like that... then you just feel so alone.  
 Is this what you're saying?  'Could... could anyone be with you in... in fear, or in a loneliness like that'?     Just really cuts so deep.   
 Just a feeling as though you're so terribly alone... in the universe, almost, and whether...  whether it even  whether anyone could help  whether it would help if you did have someone to lean on or not, you  don't know. 
 It surely would be nice if you could take someone with you a good deal of the way into your... feelings of aloneness and fear.  
 Maybe that's what you're feeling right this minute. 
 I guess you feel as though you've really... lived with the blackest possibilities... even though the facts may turn out to be quite otherwise.    But is has been... hard.  
 A real feeling of... not wanting to look that possibility in the face. 
 So that in some ways, if it came right down to it... death might be easier to face... than pain. 
 But you feel ‚ÄúI'm surely not very efficient when I'm... in pain and when I'm worrying , frightened.‚Äù   I see our time is up.
  Even in the most trivial kind of relationship the feeling is‚Ä¶‚ÄùHere comes rejection!‚Äù
  That‚Äôs almost a better phrase for it than rejection.  That the point is, you‚Äôre expecting the worst.  Exactly what the definition of worst is, may not be too easy to know.  But you just know‚Ä¶‚ÄùThis will be catastrophe.‚Äù
  So it‚Äôs in this relationship too.  There is the feeling that‚Ä¶‚ÄùLook out if I do something a little out of line‚Ä¶the world will fall in on me.‚Äù  Or something like that.  
  Mhm‚Ä¶mhm
  In the way I‚Äôm understanding that, though I‚Äôm not quite sure of that, is‚Ä¶ you would want to be the best possible here in my terms.  Is that the way you mean it?
  But anyway, that doesn‚Äôt quite catch the present feeling.
  Mhm.  Mhm.
  Sorta that‚Ä¶that‚Äôs
  That sorta‚Ä¶that‚Ä¶that has felt good.  Is this the stage you‚Äôre in or about to leave‚Ä¶or something?
  Is it this‚Ä¶
  It just seems like a whole world full of fathers and mothers that you must strive and strive and strive to please even though it‚Äôs a pretty hopeless task anyway.
  That‚Äôs what gives this relationship that different quality because you feel that I‚Äôm a different kind of father sorta‚Ä¶
  Seems as though that would feel very good‚Ä¶to be able to meet someone‚Äôs demand that you please them with the feeling‚Ä¶‚ÄùWell, that‚Äôs not my prime object.‚Äù
  But you really exist unique in the universe kinda an‚Äô all separate from anyone else.
  ‚Ä¶That the feeling level was‚Ä¶‚ÄùI don‚Äôt like this so you mustn‚Äôt because you‚Äôre a part of me.‚Äù
  ‚ÄúIf a bright world is possible, then maybe I could bear my aloneness, but previously, certainly I haven‚Äôt thought either was possible.‚Äù
  Hurting yourself‚Ä¶ya
 So when you‚Äôve experienced it that way, it‚Äôs just a complete dilemma.
  Uhm mmm.
  mhm
  I could see that it was‚Ä¶that somehow just that‚Ä¶that statement that, ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt really have to deal with that‚Ä¶those past feelings‚Ä¶‚Äù
  ‚ÄúIt just isn‚Äôt necessary that I struggle into those old patterns any longer.  What I‚Äôve got is something different from that.
  Mhm mhm.
  That it seems quite clear that the fear you have of people isn‚Äôt really fear of them as individuals outside of yourself; it is much more truly a fear of the dark side of you.
  ‚ÄúWhat is it I fear in myself that I see out in these other people?‚Äù
  Seems as though, ‚Äúall the dark things, hurting, and being hurt, and decay, corruption, ugliness, death and‚Ä¶it‚Äôs all of those I‚Äôm afraid of.‚Äù
 Just to wander into that field verbally and even name all these things that have to do with this dark side of hurting and rottenness‚Ä¶That‚Äôs frightening in itself.
  OK
  Something more corrupt and perverse and‚Ä¶
  ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs what makes it seem a little shaky‚Äù‚Ä¶is that what you‚Äôre saying?  Because of that lovely bright world, there didn‚Äôt seem to be any place‚Ä¶to be any place for this stink and corruption.
  Mhm
  The way I‚Äôm understanding that, is that it‚Äôs sorta possible for you to stray into ways of being with me, for example, that would be very frightening and if I got the earlier part of what you said‚Ä¶and when you‚Äôre frightened, then you look out to see what other people want instead of looking within.
  ‚ÄúHow‚Äôs he taking this?‚Äù ‚Ä¶kinda‚Ä¶
  Ya, so when you‚Äôre frightened you have to have the feedback.  And if you‚Äôre not frightened, then you can look inward‚Ä¶
  Mhm mhm.  If the little boy feels this feels good to me, it‚Äôs satisfying to me to do this‚Ä¶‚ÄùBut is it all right with you?‚Äù
 So it‚Äôs by no means a casual question; it‚Äôs a terribly crucial question‚Ä¶‚ÄùIf it‚Äôs all right with you‚Äù, because if it isn‚Äôt, then ‚ÄúI‚Äôm alone and in the dark world again.‚Äù
  This isn‚Äôt anything hypothetical.  This is the world you‚Äôve lived in.  
  Is this what you‚Äôre saying there?  ‚ÄúThat even when I find some understanding there‚Äôs always an end to it.‚Äù  Or  ‚Äúpoint where I‚Äôm not understood.‚Äù  
  Mhm mhm.
  ‚ÄúI‚Äôve looked for the perfect understanding of me because I don‚Äôt know myself, but I hope maybe I could find somebody who did know me.‚Äù
  That you feel that that can‚Äôt be.  ‚ÄúI doubt very much that that can be the solution there.‚Äù
  Sounds like that‚Äôs easy enough to see logically.
  So sorta in one sense you sorta perceive yourself as being so different it‚Äôs hard to believe you even belong to their family.  Yet, on the other hand, the feeling‚Ä¶‚Äù But this up ‚Äòtil recently has been my world‚Ä¶my feelings won‚Äôt give them up.‚Äù
 Mhm..mhm.
  So that if I let myself slip into this‚Ä¶pattern which I do slip into of feeling that my feelings are just these elements out in my parents and so on‚Ä¶ then ‚ÄúI‚Äôve given myself up and I don‚Äôt want that.  And the only solution that I can see is just‚Ä¶let‚Äôs not see them at all..let‚Äôs‚Ä¶‚Äù
  So in that sense you just wish they would be out of your life so that‚Ä¶then you could‚Ä¶
  Mhm.
  Mhm
  And what you really wish is that you weren‚Äôt carrying them around inside of you in a way  that everything you do is either for their approval or to‚Ä¶to show that you can stand against their approval or in some way completely in relation to them.
  Sorta‚Ä¶Sorta shocking to you to find what your feelings feel on that score.
  ‚ÄúIt would be shocking to somebody else.‚Äù
  That you feel that now that your notion is that one of the most prominent things you would feel at their funeral would be relief.
  It‚Äôs kind of a desire to wave a magic wand and have it true that your parents never happened to you.  
 Uhm‚Ä¶That bond that they really do have a hold on your umbilical cord.
  As though if there‚Äôs a disturbance in the relationship between you‚Ä¶then you do just feel it as though it was a strain on your umbilicus.
  Most vulnerable point or something.
  Mhm‚Ä¶mhm
  I guess if you really try to be precise, it‚Äôs hard to put it in words, but‚Ä¶but still there is a real desire that you could say..not as a formula but as something really deeply felt, that ‚ÄúI‚Äôm a whole person separate and apart from them.‚Äù
  You might say that now‚Ä¶but you don‚Äôt really feel that way.
  Ya.  ‚ÄúAnything as loathsome as I am, if I were separate from them, that would just be the loathsomeness‚Ä¶I really need them to be at all worthwhile.‚Äù
  That feeling kinda surprises you.  
  Your reaction is sorta‚Ä¶‚ÄùIs that the way I‚Äôve been looking at it?‚Äù  
 ‚ÄúI‚Äôll put up with you and let‚Äôs try not to make it too evident that you are a monster.‚Äù
  Because ‚Äúthere‚Äôs nobody else who would put up with you.  But we will; we‚Äôll take care of you.‚Äù
  ‚ÄúLet‚Äôs have it clear that you‚Äôre contemptible.  But if you‚Äôll sorta play along, we‚Äôll try to take care of you.‚Äù
  Ya.  I guess one of the phrases comes back to me that you used in another little way‚Ä¶sorta as though they were saying‚Ä¶‚ÄùYou are an awful creature, but what a lucky fellow you are because‚Ä¶we‚Äôll put up with it.‚Äù  
  You don‚Äôt want to make it any darker than it is.  You don‚Äôt want to put things on them that aren‚Äôt true, but it does seem rather deeply true if you‚Äôre to describe where you had experienced it‚Ä¶then a part of it‚Ä¶
  Mhm.  Right now it feels that this is an awfully true description or certainly one aspect of the relationship.
  It‚Äôs as though that weepiness is kinda of a softening of that shield or barrier that‚Äôs beginning to dissolve.
  This is kinda a delayed reaction in a sense of what you didn‚Äôt feel at the time‚Ä¶or couldn‚Äôt let yourself feel or something.
 That‚Äôs the question that would have made sense to you.
  ‚ÄòCause it‚Äôs a very pervasive thing that covers a lot of feelings really that sorta adds up to, ‚ÄúNothing is worth-while; everything is hopeless.‚Äù
  I‚Äôm getting at it‚Ä¶it‚Äôs apt to‚Ä¶it just sorta hits you and hits you completely.  There isn‚Äôt one thing is really right; everything is negative.
  This is the boom with the elephant‚Äôs trunk‚Ä¶it just
  Sorta, ‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs the use of struggling?‚Äù ..you know.  ‚ÄúIt‚Äôll happen again.‚Äù
  ‚ÄúIt might be a temporary break in it or something but what use is there in that?  There‚Äôs no real hope to it.‚Äù
  So‚Ä¶‚ÄùTry, try and prove it to me.‚Äù
  Mhm.
  Hard to know what feeling comes over ya‚Ä¶that brings the tears.
 This what you‚Äôre saying there?  ‚Ä¶‚ÄùThat maybe the tears come over me when I really do sense what it means to be so hurt?‚Äù  
  Just the sign of despair‚Ä¶‚ÄùIt‚Äôs just useless.‚Äù
  What‚Äôs that?
  Mhm.
  It‚Äôs a sort of you‚Äôre saying‚Ä¶
  If I understand that it seems as though your behavior or your actions don‚Äôt say this but your feelings do say, ‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs the use?‚Äù
  You pulled it out but you put it back because you‚Äôre very sure of the meaning it has for you‚Ä¶you feel, ‚ÄúI shouldn‚Äôt mean that here.‚Äù
  Sorta a sense pulling out the cigarette‚Ä¶the feeling that oh.. ‚ÄúOK  it‚Äôs so useless I will get away from myself‚Ä¶‚Äù
  It‚Äôs just as though you‚Äôre kinda sitting in that feeling of complete despair and hopelessness‚Ä¶‚ÄùThere is no use.‚Äù
  Really covers everything.
 Certainly had me too.  I‚Äôm useless just as you‚Äôre useless.
  Kind of a large order .
  M-hm.
  ‚ÄúWelcome any agenda.‚Äù  
  M-hm.  
  M-hm.  M-hm.
  M-hm m-hm‚Ä¶interests me.  That is, if‚Ä¶if during a period of several days and we haven‚Äôt seen each other, something important or troubling occurs, then it seems as though a shell kind of hardens up‚Ä¶or something and when you come in here you just‚Ä¶there‚Äôs nothing to talk about.  There‚Äôs‚Ä¶
  M-hm.  M-hm.
  Ya‚Ä¶m-hm.
 But at least this is a feeling that you‚Äôve experienced before.  M-hm.
  Ya, ya, it does and it‚Ä¶and that‚Äôs why it kinda clicked with me.  It just‚Ä¶it seems as though you‚Äôre putting it more clearly than I had ever understood it  before.  
  M-hm  m-hm.
  M-hm  m-hm.
  Just to‚Ä¶.
  Kinda realize this wall or barrier you‚Äôve been talking about makes you real uneasy because then how in the hell do you know ordinarily whether you‚Äôre dealing with a wall or with a real thing?
  M-hm  m-hm  m-hm
  I get that‚Ä¶I get that.  In other words‚Ä¶when you came in you could say most truthfully, ‚ÄúI‚Äôm not feeling anything or concerned about anything.‚Äù  But somewhere in you, something knew that wasn‚Äôt so and little by little you could sense a little of‚Ä¶
  M-hm  m-hm.  Thinking of time as a barrier or distance you realize, ‚Äúyes, and there are other‚Ä¶other distances involved here too.‚Äù  M-hm‚Ä¶
  M-hm  m-hm.  The way I‚Äôm understanding that is that when something happened in you that you really wanted to communicate and then.‚Ä¶ frustrated‚Ä¶you were frustrated by circumstances or something‚Ä¶then it is as though our relationship is at least temporarily damaged by that.
 Some more distant thing or it is as though we hadn‚Äôt seen each other for a long time.
  M-hm.
  It‚Äôs sorta as though, at least this is the way I catch that; it‚Äôs sorta as though you‚Äôre cut off from that part of yourself that didn‚Äôt get communicated.
  yes‚Ä¶.
  M-hm.
  M-hm‚Ä¶so that‚Ä¶so that this immediate experience is also very much like other things where you‚Äôve felt something deeply and then never communicated or shared it and then it can just remain an undigested lump in you for years and years.
  So that you saw your thesis and lots of what you‚Äôve done and will do in the future as just being something you were doing because you were frightened and to give you a secure little spot.  
  M-hm.  That‚Äôs something you can feel right this minute and have been feeling and perhaps are feeling in regard to our relationship too.
  M-hm m-hm.  ‚ÄúLet me hang on to this because I‚Äôd be terribly scared if I didn‚Äôt.  Let me hold on to it‚Ä¶‚Äù .
  In both instances it‚Äôs kinda of a pleading thing too, isn‚Äôt it?  ‚ÄúLet me have this because I need it badly‚Ä¶I‚Äôd be awfully frightened without it.‚Äù  
 Put your hands in kinda supplication.
  It‚Äôs just awful to realize‚Ä¶‚Äùwhy in posture and in tone and everything I‚Äôm just supplicating‚Ä¶please!‚Äù
  Frightens even worse‚Ä¶
  Just seems to you‚Ä¶‚ÄùI‚Äôve never been a person who has begged or pleaded or felt that way.‚Äù
  So on the one hand it‚Äôs a real wonderful feeling, kind of a awed feeling, I guess.
  ‚Ä¶tears that come to your eyes a little and on the other hand‚Ä¶‚Äùreally a frightening thing if this was in me that I didn‚Äôt know at all, what else, how many more things?‚Äù
  and somehow it does sorta‚Ä¶
 ‚ÄúThis fear just seems so gigantic compared to any real thing that could happen‚Ä¶and it doesn‚Äôt seem to be related to anything on the outside world at all‚Ä¶it somehow seems that nobody could be that afraid outside of him.‚Äù
  You‚Äôd much rather‚Ä¶you‚Äôd much rather take what ever you take from the outside than‚Ä¶than feel that great a fear.  You‚Äôd much rather even if it were the worst thing you could imagine‚Ä¶you wouldn‚Äôt let yourself get this afraid because that would be worse than the thing that would happen to you.  M-hm M-hm.
  Yes I do.  There‚Äôs just nothing that this world could do to you could frighten you as much as this fear and you would‚Ä¶why you would take anything the world could do to you with all the fear that‚Ä¶that might entail rather than experience this fear.
  The most terrifying real thing you could possibly dream up could not produce this bad an effect.
  M-hm.  M-hm.  How could it be that the fear you experience is worse in itself than any consequence you could suffer.
  One thing I want to mention.  We haven‚Äôt said anything about a‚Ä¶a what you want to do while I‚Äôm gone.  But one thing I would like if you‚Äôre willing‚Ä¶I‚Äôd like for you to take that series of tests again sometime shortly after I go.  Will that be OK?
  Ah‚Ä¶do you want to just get in touch with Goff yourself or do you want me to act as middle man or ask him to get in touch with you?  That the best deal?
  Is that OK?  Will you be here between December 15 and Christmas?  I mean, will that be a possible time?  You know?  OK.
  I don‚Äôt know why but I get the feeling that‚Ä¶each time that comes up‚Ä¶it almost seems to me as if it‚Äôs something new hitting you‚Ä¶I mean, as though its been put away and almost as though‚Ä¶‚ÄùOh, my God he‚Äôs leaving me‚Äù‚Ä¶hits almost‚Ä¶like a new thing.  Is there any truth to that?  Or am I wrong?  
  Ya.  I see.  It isn‚Äôt so much a surprise as‚Ä¶‚Äùwell course it‚Äôs the kind of thing that always happens.‚Äù
 Mhm.  Mhm.
  Mhm.  Mhm.  It kinda adds another bit to that‚Ä¶‚Äùwhat‚Äôs the use‚Äù feeling‚Äô but also it‚Äôs something that what ever feelings there are around my going‚Ä¶you haven‚Äôt let yourself feel entirely.
  I‚Äôm just going to make sure that----
  Am I getting this right?  It feels as though there‚Äôs a relationship between this discouragement and what ever in hell caused it and the tension you feel when you‚Äôre with people.  Though you‚Äôre getting a little closer to the realization of the tension only‚Ä¶I guess also it makes you realize‚Ä¶.‚ÄùOh, My God there‚Äôs a lot of it.  It crops up in lots of instances.‚Äù
  So in a sense something happens in your gut and then after that you realize‚Ä¶‚ÄùOh yes, I‚Äôm tense.‚Äù
  Something like that?
  Mhm  
  Mhm‚Ä¶But it‚Äôs a kind of an awareness of how‚Ä¶.
  Mhm.  Mhm‚Ä¶
  It seems to me you do have some ways of getting out of this if the rough period‚Ä¶ you‚Äôre getting into in almost any relationship.  But it‚Äôs darn difficult.
 Well part of it‚Ä¶ I guess I was planning to continue it‚Ä¶then stopped.  
  Could you use your jacket?
  Anyhow over the long run you can see some progress in this but still it is greatly puzzling that you seem so willing to let yourself get into a situation almost into a corner in which there will be physiological upset and where you will feel very tense.
  Hopeless‚Ä¶Am I getting this right‚Ä¶that it seems as though when you feel hopeless then that kinda opens the gate to the tensions?
  I see‚Ä¶Ya.  Now, now I do get it clear, I guess.  In other words when you begin to feel hopeless then it seems so necessary to distract yourself from yourself and some‚Ä¶.
  of these things creates great physiological tensions and really‚Ä¶..
  and really aren‚Äôt good for you nevertheless they distract you from the hopelessness.
  OK.  ‚ÄúI‚Äôll let myself get all tense and stirred up physiologically...so long as that relieves me for a time of this futile hopeless feeling.‚Äù
  It seems so kinda different‚Ä¶you really want ta‚Ä¶to shape it against your feelings but it seems as though it really is true that you have used such things perhaps to escape from the hopelessness.
  Kinda doesn‚Äôt like it because even when I talk about it, it kinda lets you into it a little bit..but it, it is just a blank slew of despond where the ongoing present doesn‚Äôt hold a thing for you, of achievement, of happiness, of satisfaction, of anything.
 And that‚Äôs the feeling you wanted to share but it has seemed as though sharing that feeling reduces not only  you but the other person‚Ä¶.
  ‚Ä¶to to just cold grey ashes.
  That makes the feeling has been that this is something that would overwhelm anyone.
  They can‚Äôt take it either and there is no answer.
  Oh I guess I‚Äôm not that cold.  
  It sort of strikes me that‚Ä¶it‚Äôs just kinda meaningful you‚Äôre wanting of warmth at this point.
  ‚ÄúHow can I get into this awful feeling‚Ä¶unless I‚Äôm at least warmed and‚Ä¶‚Äù
  I think it‚Äôs just..well maybe that‚Äôs a little far fetched.
  Pull up that chair..Pull up that chair close to the radiator
  But you‚Äôre not sure just quite what if it‚Äôs in your voice, your muscles.  You can feel some kind of tension rising.
 This is just the kind of situation that you‚Äôre feeling right now that you don‚Äôt know quite how to cope with but you do various things to try to deal with‚Ä¶smoke, eat, walk out‚Ä¶.
  Ya.  That‚Äôs really tough when it just‚Ä¶when you can‚Äôt seem to get rid of it and it just stays.  
  Sounds though you say that with real feeling, that it‚Äôs been awfully, awfully tough to carry all this tension with you for years     
  Mhm.  Mhm.
  But to just carry openly within to yourself the realization that, ‚ÄúI am this full of tension most of the time.‚Äù ‚Ä¶well that just seems like too much‚Ä¶you have too‚Ä¶
  Mhm.  Mhm.
  I see, ‚ÄúIf I‚Äôm really that sensitive and that precariously balanced why I have to be thinking about myself all the time?‚Äù
  It seems as if, that‚Äôs forbidden somehow‚Ä¶
  Mhm.   Mhm
  Mhm.  Mhm.
 So if you sorta realized how much tension there was in you it would seem as though then you would have to be almost constantly concerned for yourself and jeepers‚Ä¶you‚Äôre sick of that‚Ä¶I mean‚Ä¶you know
  So that‚Ä¶.
  So this memory tells you back‚Ä¶way back in childhood even though your mother thought you didn‚Äôt complain enough‚Ä¶that seemed to you meaningless.  Sure you‚Äôre hurt, but what‚Äôs the use.
  Seems though that this is so remote‚Ä¶the phrase hardly has meaning for you‚Ä¶it just doesn‚Äôt make sense quite‚Ä¶Another person could be concerned about you‚Ä¶but what would it even mean to feel concerned for yourself.
  I don‚Äôt know‚Ä¶Does this help any?  Or what would it mean if you really cared about yourself.
  Mhm.  Mhm.
  That‚Äôs right.  Mhm.  What would it mean to take a cherishing caring kind of an attitude toward yourself..almost like a mother would do.
  ‚ÄúI never thought I‚Äôd wanted to be tender or caring toward myself‚Ä¶my body‚Äù
  So the physiological me can a‚Ä¶.Mhm..
  And it does seem possible, I mean‚Ä¶I guess you can kinda‚Ä¶conceive of it.  But it doesn‚Äôt seem like an attitude you‚Äôve ever felt.
 It almost‚Ä¶I get the impression‚Ä¶it almost seems to feel like, ‚Äúthis is, this is talking in a foreign language.  I don‚Äôt get it‚Ä¶what it would mean‚Ä¶..‚Äù
  ‚ÄúHow could that be?‚Äù
  I kinda sensed a little‚Ä¶
  Guess..‚ÄùIt‚Äôs just doesn‚Äôt hardly seem logically possible what sense does it make?‚Äù  And yet you can really feel it in yourself at this moment of what it might be like to feel kind of a tender concern for you?
  Mhm.  Mhm.
  That all the things that go‚Ä¶‚Ä¶
  Mhm.  Mhm.  But I guess it‚Äôs why it has reality for you‚Ä¶you can see what would be involved and feeling that way toward someone else..   but as far as yourself goes‚Ä¶.you‚Äôre always that, ‚Äúwell that‚Äôs someone else‚Äôs job‚Ä¶‚Äù
  Mhm.  Mhm.  Mhm.
  You‚Äôre still sorta asking‚Ä¶..‚Äùyou mean it‚Äôs possible to feel this way?‚Äù
  It‚Äôs really kind of‚Ä¶
 It seems that that‚Äôs such a strange concept to realize, ‚Äúwhy it would mean I would face the world as though a part of my primary responsibility was taking care of this precious individual whom is me‚Ä¶.whom I love.‚Äù
  Mhm.  Mhm.
  It just seems weird.
  Something kinda moving about that‚Ä¶..
  ‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs the grammar of that‚Ä¶‚Äù or something   ‚ÄúHow is that possible?‚Äù
  Mhm.  Almost as if your mind says‚Ä¶it doesn‚Äôt make sense to you and in the same thing‚Ä¶But your feelings say‚Ä¶. ‚ÄúGod it feels good even to contemplate it.‚Äù
  Kind of a real welcome possibility to think that, ‚Äúmaybe I could feel of taking tender care of me.‚Äù
  It would sorta have to be the basis of it.
  ‚ÄúWhere did this come from?‚Äù
  Feeling that close and that warm
 Guess you‚Äôre whole feeling or that is kinda‚Ä¶‚Äùgosh‚Ä¶‚Äù
  I see we‚Äôve got to do something about the time.
  Monday, 4:30 OK?
  Saturday is better?  Mhm.
  OK.  Saturday at 3:30.  How‚Äôs that then?
  No‚Ä¶not discouraged.  I‚Äôve debated it, but I wouldn‚Äôt say yes if I didn‚Äôt mean it.
  I know.
  This is an expression of just what you‚Äôve been talking about.
  OK.  See you Saturday 3:30.
 Then you think that, you really feel it's almost as though your life is her life, or her life is your life, whichever you want to put it, and that these recent, this recent upset on her part has made that shockingly evident to you.  Is that ...?
 M-hm.  I see.
 It sort of hits you that this isn't the right kind of relationship.
 Sort of feel all of a sudden that here is something that is unwholesome, wrong somehow, it's wrong for me.  And yet...just what all that is, you can't say or can't even be sure probably in your own mind.
 M-hm, m-hm.
 Why should it be necessary for you to live your life in that way?
 After all, you don't...
 M-hm.  That is, you mean, you don't want that kind of relationship to continue, is that ...
 I'm not quite clear there as to what you were saying before, that when this first hit you, and I assume by that that you mean when Peggy first had the difficulty, then it really frightened you as to what you saw in the relationship.  Is that what you mean, you were...?
 M-hm.
 M-hm, m-hm.
 Then that came about partly in this order as I get it.  At first you felt fearful for what, well, you certainly seemed to fear what might happen to her and within her.
 And gradually realizing that that was fear of what was happening to your extension in her almost.
 And then there's beginning to feel other elements had existed there, one of them being a sense of real competition with her, a thing that...
 ...you don't like, don't want and yet, there does seem to be an element of it in the picture.
 Shouldn‚Äôt be that kind of competition.
 You're sure of your past feeling.  That you felt that you just had to shield her from her father's criticism and so on.  Now you've begun to question...what was I really doing there?  And...
 You don't like at all some of these elements that you have...begun to perceive in yourself in these last few weeks, hm?
 These feelings aren't complete strangers to you.  It's just that in the past you've just glimpsed them and that's all.
 Somehow the realization that this positive element exists almost makes it more surprising that...
 ...the negative picture of these things that you regard as unwholesome...exists alongside of it.
 M-hm.  M-hm.
 There was such a discrepancy between the kind of thing that...
 ... you really wanted for her ... to free her and to let her be an independent person and all ...
 The difference between that and what you now see as the relationship makes you feel that it cuts fairly deep, but I gather only strengthens your feeling that you do want to free her...you do want to let her loose.
 And not only for her sake but for yours.
 She'd almost have to resent you, is that it?
 Whether she knows it or not.
 Intellectually that doesn't seem very reasonable but in the...
 ...and feeling there's just that strong desire to say, I'm not going to adapt to one more thing.
 M-hm, I'm not sure I get the feeling there, but it sounds as though you're saying, I've done all the adapting, all the adjusting that I possibly can.  I don't want to do any more.  And...I'm not quite sure about the last one.  Maybe I can just sort of cover up the situation so I don't have to.  Is that...?
 M-hm.  Dislike doing the right thing.
 Just to hell with doing the right thing.
 M-hm.  Something that seems very strong.
 Feel it would just... crush him if he thought that you didn't want to do the right thing or at least you couldn't tell him that, but you're sure that in your behavior you'll go ahead and try to.
 M-hm.  You feel he feels so deeply or so strongly that you should want to do the right thing that he really couldn't just comprehend not wanting to do the right thing.
 You mean, you're saying there that...right thing means, in quotes, means superficially right thing?  Is that...? That isn't quite clear to me, I don't think.
 M-hm.  Here is your responsible, socially minded, somewhat unselfish sort of role that you should be playing, and at least at the moment you feel, the hell with it.
 M-hm.  M-hm.    Very satisfying to sort of kick over those traces, at least in your feelings.
 In some way that you don't quite understand, it almost seems as though getting that feeling out makes it easier to go back and face the things you've really got to face, is that... ?
 You're always having, you're always going to have to go back to that situation, is that.... ?
 I see.  Wasn't quite sure.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  That somehow it ties in with a lack in confidence in yourself and that somehow helps to balance that...
 You say that's a rather conflicting thing, that you...recognize that somehow you could control in subtle ways, and keep her from certain satisfactions, and yet that you aren't going to be fully satisfied unless she had those...
 No?
 M-hm.
 ...You're saying you outdo her yourself.
 This may not be the feeling but...sort of the feeling that you could be on top as far as...situations are concerned....
 M-hm.  M-hm.
 Been kind of...sort of a one-sided...
 Competition.  That kind of bowls you over.
 M-hm.  She has just lots of good qualities and you really like her.
 In a sense, you'd like her if she wasn't your daughter.
 For both your sakes.
 You know that you don't want to dig too deep too fast.  And maybe that is tied in with this feeling of the hell with doing the right thing.
 A shield is a necessary thing at this point.
 Sorry that I missed one word.  You do rather enjoy...?
 M-hm.
 May be another experience which is necessary to you.
 You say there's a basic confidence that you can lick it.
 M-hm.  
 You don't think it's going to be easy or short, but you think it can be done.
 M-hm.
 At any rate you're quite certain that...some things will be very difficult to put into words and maybe some things that won't be necessary to put into words.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  As I get that, you feel that the present situation you don't like, and it seems unwholesome.  Looks to you like a product of frustration in just every area of your life, and as I get the meaning of that last phrase, it is that even the means of balancing all that frustration is no longer any good.
 It isn't doing the trick.
 No use kidding yourself about that.
 M-hm.    You're quite certain that you'll not only go on doing it, but there'll be yourself understanding yourself in some partial way.  But...you're going to be quite uncertain as to whether maybe part of the reason for doing it is because you want to do it.
 No amount of just policing yourself will...
 ...hm, basically change the picture.
 M-hm. Necessary for her that you should...think about and face yourself, is that...?
 Well, I see our forty-five minutes is about up and maybe this would be a stopping place because I'd like to ask one or two practical questions.
 How often do you think you'd like to come in?
 Well, I think I would just say this, that that's perfectly agreeable, and...on the other hand, I would want it to be quite clear that service isn't limited by finances.  We must collect fees, true, we have to...but it isn't limited by financial situation.
 All right.
 Whatever you feel is...I mean, you know your own family finances and your situation.  You're the one to set it, and it's quite alright with me if it seems reasonable to you.
 It's good, but it has been a burden.
 Alright, let's plan on twice a week and too they like to know at the desk, how do you want to, want to pay that once a week or...twice
 And if for any reason you shouldn't bring any money, do you want us to send you a bill or will you just bring it in next time?
 Yeah.  I'll give them a note about this, and you always pay the fee at the desk.
 Well, now...
 Don't want to go too far today.
 ...In other words your whole intellectual point of view and philosophy and notion of society and so on would be entirely opposed to a competitive kind of situation.  And yet you've begun to question a little that maybe you are much more competitive than you have...more competitive in your feelings than you have wanted to think.
 That's a theoretical possibility, but that isn't...
" It's really the structure you've had, that has functioned and worked and brought you satisfaction and the solution of problems and so on.  Really a lot that can be said for it.  And yet you have some feeling that, ""it ain't right somehow""."
 ...in other words, that's what brings it to focus or...
 Because you see a real risk in the way that situation is going, that makes you determined to do something about the structure you have developed over the years.    Is that...
 In other words you're raising the question, did I do right in helping her to see, and passing along to her the flaws in our culture which have been frustrating to me?  Is that right?  Or did I just keep her from living happily in the culture as it exists?  Is that ...
 Feel you've helped to make her different from others.  And you wonder, will that cut her off from the acceptance that she should have from others.
 It isn't so much a question of whether you decided right.  You've given to her what you are.  Still that doesn't stop you from being concerned about, well about the effects of that.  Is that ...
 Then there's that double feeling of wanting to shield her from criticism.  And yet at the same time realizing you had a part in what she may be criticized for.
 That's right.  That's it.  And what do I do?  What do I suddenly do?  I revise my concepts and my feelings of, about things?  That's pretty hard too.
 Are you supposed to take a different view of the world?
 M-hm.  In other words, there has been a difference between you on this score.    And some of the things that have happened recently makes you...
 ...Think a little bit, maybe he was right.
" That is, you felt fairly sure that that stand-by sort of role was a sound one.  Now though you are beginning to question, ""is that what prepares the child for the world she has to live in?""."
 M-hm.  You wonder if you should have tried to adopt another point of view in bringing her up.  One more like your husband's, is that...
 ...something a little closer to the convention.
 Realize that in life very likely you'll change those views.  And yet you wonder whether you have held the right ones, or the most successful ones.
" M-hm.  If I understand that right, you're wondering ""If both her father and I had held much the point of view which to me seems right, would it then have been also beneficial to either of you."
 And those were elements that would set up conflicts in her.
 In other words, what you referred to as hedging has sort of helped you to review the situation a bit and you feel that, here I'm not quite clear, you feel that you're not going to change some of the fundamental orientation that you have.  Is that...
 In other words your sort of reaffirming some of the basic views that you held in regard to the culture and in regard to standing by and her development.  And you do want to, as I get it, add to that to various things, but as I understand what you're saying now, it is that you don't expect to basically contradict the, uh, fundamental point of view that you've had.  Is that...
 How can you accept her as an adult or a growing person  rather than just as a child?
 Whereas the kind of goal you want to reach probably can be more easily achieved when you understand some aspects of yourself.
 See this sort of thing you've just been talking about is a way of getting along while you work on yourself.    Is that ...
 M-hm.  You're saying there, that it's necessary to your own integrity to operate in terms of the views that seem to you right, than to try to operate on some other principle.  That would make it even more difficult to get at the things within yourself.
 In other words you're not without questioning her conflict in regard to the principles you've utilized because I gather that what you're wondering is, have you unfitted her for the kind of people that she might meet.
 ...general idea...
" I think I get you.  You mean there, that feeling you wind up is, ""I am right but what are these right views doing to her?""  Is that..."
" In other words this experience of hers has tended to make you feel at least at times, ""well this proves I'm all wrong"".  Is that what you're saying?  Or do I miss that?"
 Somehow you haven't been able to give her those experiences.
 Just as though there had been something qualitatively better, something good  about the relationship.
 As I get it, it concerned you for what that might mean for her , but somehow it didn't tense you up.
 It's a whole series of deep questions as to  how did it originate?   What could be the causes?  How could it have resulted in something which I don't want.
 You feel really sad that it occurred.
 Somehow the shocked element has decreased.  
 Feel very much stumped at this point.  Guess our time's just about up for today.
 
 You mean there, that that was sort of somehow a pseudo-feeling.  This that you felt here last time was a real, genuine emotion of deep regret.
 But the relationship is improving, if I understand you rightly.  Not because you've thought it all over and planned to do something differently but somehow in acting spontaneously there has been some improvement, even though you realize that you're not secure and still...
 Sort of more that there are glimmers of  better relationship.
 Just as muddled inside, and not at all sure how to get to whatever there is to get  to.
 You really didn't love her but you were quite sure that was true of others and that some of them at least came to develop love through playing a certain role in relation to the child, is that...
 You felt that they probably were never really aware of the fact that they, that they hadn't loved the child.
 Can't help but wonder if the way you felt with that, within yourself may have...you have the feeling that you had, may really have hurt her.  
 So that your marriage has been deeply frustrating, not always in the same way.  In fact in quite different phases.  But, at least, in the later days, being a fighting back to, to defend yourself, I take it.  I mean you emphasize the fact that you had some worth.  And yet through it all is a feeling that you really don't care.
 Not only that feeling itself but the satisfaction that you feel in expressing it.
 You don't expect to really behave that way and yet that doesn't alter the fact that you feel it and find satisfaction in feeling it.  You don't give one hoot.
 Certainly one of the things that may have led to some of this identification with Peggy is the fact that sexually you found no satisfaction.
 It may also tie in with this...
 Feel that she...
 There is at times almost a, a feeling of something akin to sexual satisfaction in thinking of that fact that she may find sexual outlet and sexual satisfaction.
 It makes you wonder if exploring that very secret and private feeling that you don't give a damn might lead to some things, might lead to finding something better, something more constructive that you can put in place.  Is that what you're saying?
 Intellectually you don't regard it as sound or right.  But from the feeling point of view you'd just as soon take Peggy and walk straight out of that and never think of it again.
 Almost a complete indifference.  Is that the flavor of it?  Just don't feel that's right but still that is what you feel.  I don't know if that's the right word for it.
" But this is something that moves around and has it's being inside of you. But always with the proviso, ""Of course I wouldn't be doing this because I don't want to hurt anyone""."
" You get a real kick out of the fact ... ""I don't give a damn"". ...."
 The only satisfaction is real pleasure, with kind of a funny tinge to it.
" Sort of, if I get the feeling, ""Hurray, I don't give a damn""."
 Somehow within that feeling there lies the key to some things.  Or at least there lies some significant material for you.
 It's not just something you talk about here, it's something you've really experienced.
 Are you saying there that there's enough force to this feeling, enough strength to it that if somehow it were turned in a different direction it might really see you through some things?  Is that what you mean?
 That if really you were strong enough within yourself so that you didn't care that would be a security, a strength within you.
 The same words still might be used to describe it but it would have a definitely different, stronger meaning without some of the unpleasant angles.
 I get the feeling that that really has lots of meaning for you.
  I really only feel it very, very strongly here.   Remember once I, I spoke about the...I, I thought I was a competitive person?  I don't think that's true.  I, I...
 ...You don't think that's...
  You think a more accurate description of it is that it's a desire to be something, to do something.
 The potentialities have never been expressed but crave expression.
 M-hm.  Had she been able to achieve and do some of these kind of things that, that had a lot of meaning for you, you might have resented the fact that  she had gotten there.
 What you were looking for was not entirely for her but for you.
 What you craved is a response and a recognition from others, not just the...
 There's been a strong desire to be doing something worthwhile along with a complete apathy in regard to doing anything, is that...?
 You're pulled in several different directions.
 You're sure that to the external world, and to your self to some extent you're rationally well adjusted.  But on the other hand you feel that you're a walking big chunk of sublimation.
 The hell with that way of getting along.
 Too hard to carry the burden of being yourself in that way.
 Not a dislike, but more a getting acquainted with yourself.  Kind of a face-to-face with yourself.
 More discovery almost than dislike.  Is that what you're saying?
 It isn't an unexpected discovery.
 Quite sure that what ever is ahead, you doubt if it's so much shock as it is more learning how to live with the self that you're meeting.  Looks like time...
 A kind of a disappointing thing to have occur.
 It was a new discovery for you.
 You find yourself more interested, and surprised a bit at some of the facets of her personality  as it's coming out in some of these ways of behaviour.  But you don't feel concerned about it.  And wonder why you're not concerned or whether you should be.
 You see certain objective facts that should be negative but your feeling is that in spite of those there isn't real danger for her in the, in the situation.
 Seems at least an intellectual possibility to you that your feelings might be wrong, and his concern might be a little more correct way of looking at it.
 In those respects you're glad to see her have this kind of an experience.
 That is, you doubt if really we control very much.   We just sometimes think we do.  But maybe I should put a question mark after that.
 You're fearful you may be sort of misled or blinded in your judgment by the fact that certainly the immediate results are good.
 Several angles there.  Feel that it is safe.  Feeling that you might be wrong.  Feeling that it would be a terrible thing for you if it turned out that her father was right and you were wrong.
 You have more certainty about that feeling, that trying  to intervene would  almost certainly do damage.
 M-hm.  That is as you've explored this feeling it's sort of emerging a little more clearly as to what it's all about.  And it seems as though it's a sort of a focus on self, or an experiencing of self that doesn't have any very close contact or sort of excludes the experiencing of and with others.  And yet that's a direction you'd like to, to move.  Is that something.
 But there is that centering in self to a degree where it could appear like selfishness to an outsider.  And where you don't want to bear burdens except those that are you.
" Are you saying that there's quite a little of this ""I don't really care a hoot"" attitude involved in a good many of your relationships with things and people outside of yourself?"
 ...There's less caution perhaps in what you think and feel.  Is that what you're saying?  That there used to be perhaps.  Less guarded.  Is that...?
 ...What you want to occur isn't in the intellectual and verbal realm, it's something with quite a different quality.
 ...What you say and so on is okay, but that isn't the real focus.  The real focus on yourself is in the  area that is not the verbal, intellectual area.
 What you're looking for are the doors through for that deeper kind of self, or to this deeper kind of self.
 There is the feeling that if you can find the doors, go in and clear out the dark corners that then the self would function without some of these behaviours that you don't like very well and that you're not very satisfied with.
 You feel quite strongly a certain amount of pity for yourself that you don't have just a problem kind of thing.  But a whole lot of areas to be dealt with somehow.  And areas that are not verbal and that are not right up here on top.
 Where are the doors, and what are the doors?
 But you're quite willing...you just feel that you're probably a pretty difficult person to live with at this point.  But the feeling rises very strongly, but he's a damn difficult person to live with and I'd like to change him even though I realize that isn't very feasible.
 ...It just annoys the hell out of you.
 M-hm.  Just the thing that irks you most is the way that he feels that he's right.
 Not the...so much that he feels right in the sense of being correct of anything, it's that he just feels inwardly that he is a righteous person.
 You just don't like in him that self righteous feeling when you know that in yourself you don't feel that way.  I mean, you recognize that you may be pretty bad in spots or at times.
 That is, his attitude gives him sort of an assumed right to weigh the scales and you don't feel that you measure up very well in those.  Possibly that's one reason you resent the judging so.
 ...If you were more sure and secure within yourself then probably you could take it or leave it sort of.  It just wouldn't make as much difference.
 All roads lead to you and that's not a pleasant destination, huh?
 Are you, are you saying there that if some of these things could be clearly and solely problems in the other person, maybe a little cutting down to size, that would be kind of satisfying?
" M-hm.  So that there is the feeling on the one hand, ""Why don't some of these other people do some of the changing?""  And then along with that there is the feeling that even if they did parts of yourself would get in your own way..."
 ...that would need some kind of looking at.
 Any amount of that first sort of thing wouldn't leave you with the inner satisfaction with yourself that you'd like.
 It'd be a real disappointment if this self of yours had to remain the same instrument for dealing with life without any change.
 Well
 That's the thing you wish you could kind of begin to get somewhere with, even though it is better, but I sort of gather, that how to get any further into it, that's sort of difficult.
 Sounds as though your feeling is that it's better, better on the surface and going along more smoothly but whether, whether really it's better at any deep level, or whether it has achieved at a deep level the kind of thing you want, that you doubt.  Is that...
 ...You realize that...I didn't get you, the feeling.  It's almost as though the...as I understand it now, some of the deeper feelings probably are, are sound.  They would operate in directions of the kind of relationships that you would like.  But you don't know whether they can be trusted yet and there's a lot there you're not sure about.
 So then, well discovering and working through some of the things you didn't like about the relationship you really have unearthed something that basically you feel quite sure about, but you're not too sure about putting that into operation, not too sure that other things may not work against this adequate expression in the whole situation.
 You've discovered the germ or the foundation was in yourself, of the relationship you really want.  Intellectually you can see how that can work out into the kind of relationship you really want. .  But, if I get it correctly, some of your feelings haven't learned that yet.  I mean they're still working at cross purposes and all of that.
" And that at the moment that, that's the process, just getting the feel and the shape and the configuration of the different pieces with a little bit of background feeling of, yeah they'll probably fit somewhere, but most of the attention's focused right on, ""What does this feel like.  And what's its texture?"""
 You can't quite describe it without using your hands.  A real, almost a sensuous sense in...
 Almost at one and the same time standing off and looking at yourself and yet somehow being closer to yourself that way than...
 I get the impression you don't sort of sit down to work on 'my problems'.  It isn't that feeling at all.
 At least there's a sense of the immediate goal of getting that feel as being the thing, not, not that you're doing this in order to see a picture, but that it's a, a satisfaction of really getting acquainted with each piece.  Is that...
 A rather different sort of experience.
 And I catch two feelings there, you seem to think that you've found real satisfaction in the fact that she can be responding to you   I mean, as though she really noticed you, she reacted to you and responded to you.  .  And if she thought that you were a stinker, well, quite possibly you have been to some extent and that doesn't seem to bring anything but satisfaction either.  I mean not, not because you're a stinker but because you don't think you've been artificial.
 You thought she has really come in contact with you as a separate person.
 I sort of sense there a feeling of relaxation about that too, that they will fill in the whole picture, spell out the whole thing.  But it sounds as though you don't feel anxious about that or determined that they shall or anything.  You're feeling the pieces.
 Are you saying there that the, that the conviction grows that any amount of plain or fancy thinking isn't, you feel, going to be the answer to this.    Something of a different order somehow.
 In other words the goal as nearly as you can formulate it is some kind of a fusion between the things intellectually you know you want and something pretty deep in you that doesn't lend itself easily to words, or labels or...it isn't that kind of a thing, but somehow it's there.
 Again without being able to put that into verbal terms, it's nevertheless a good deal of feeling and assurance that that can come about.
" ...Give any one or several of a lot of the customary reasons for lack of satisfaction in sex life and yet, I gather that as near as you can phrase it that the truer answer comes closer to being a little bit of this same thing we saw in other areas, ""I just don't care about it"".  Is that..."
 The fusion seemed to have taken place in her, at least to be possible for it to take place.
 M-hm.  Where in you they were the two selves, one intellectual and more...I gather the self that knew better and so on.  And the other one...
 A very useful self.
 Didn't hurt you too much.
 A good careful manager, and saw to it that you didn't get hurt too much and yet could get lots of things done.
 It could even stand a few wounds.
 That's right.
 Or pretend they weren't wound, or something.
 I'd like to see if I caught one phase of that correctly.  Here, here's this useful, intellectual self and this other more vague self. And you saw the fusion of those as possible to take place in Peggy rather that in you.  Is that part of the feeling?
 I see, m-hm.
 Something that intellectually appears possible but...
 Is that sort of a speculative feeling that, maybe you've envied something of her wholeness.  If you did it certainly was not something you were aware of.  And yet it may very definitely have existed.
 There may have been some fairly contradictory feelings mixed in there, of wishing that she wouldn't be a whole person.  Because if...a certain basic resentment to see her whole and not feeling whole yourself.  Is that  putting it too strongly?
 ...That kind of a thing is a possibility.
 You expect that you've probably been telling her and communicate to her a good many things besides what you've said.
 And some of them quite contradictory  to what you say.
 ...That, that term just doesn't convey the feeling  that that self has for you.
 Effective.
 It got things done.
 I see.  I see.  Because useful has a little more the connotation of constructive.  Is that...
 ...Just got thinks done.
 It's more simply the feeling that this self worked, it got things done.
 M-hm., met situations.
 Built those layers...I'm not sure that I understand where...around itself to wall out the other self?...or maybe you can't say either.
 Slowly kept building layers that in some way kept you from yourself.  Is that...?
 Protected yourself?
 I see.
 Between the two  selves.  Okay I do get that.  It's more that it kept building layers that kept more deeply, or more firmly separating these two parts whichever ...well without either one perhaps being yourself.
 And in spite of the fact that intellectually you thought that you believed in and were functioning as a whole.
 Sounds perhaps a little bit out of this world but you have a pretty strong feeling that something has to happen within you.
 Sort of has it's own time.
 That's sort of a humorous way of looking at it that gives you a lift.  Partly because it's so far from what really is going on.  Is that...
 But it sort of seems that this little touch of private humour is sort of a preparation for the fact somehow that the punch line of the real joke won't hurt too much.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  You won't be un...you won't be totally unprepared for it.  And it even will have its genuine humour to it.
 Sort of keeps you going on and it isn't a, isn't any knowledge of that sort.  It's sort of a fore-knowledge of it.
 That's right.  But there is an element of humour. 
 Well I guess our time is up.  We can close on humorous terms.
  Almost didn't get here, hm?
 Some of the things in you were trying not to come, hm?
 Just seems kind of a...war within yourself in a sense in which at the present time at least the, the predominating feeling is, it is very doubtful that this'll help; 'it's doubtful if I'm getting anywhere'.
 It is quite different, quite in contrast to the confidence that sometimes you've    expressed,  that you feel is just the opposite side of the picture.  Feel no confidence that this will, that you'll be able to work it out or work through to anything that you want.  Is that...something of the feeling?
 M-hm.  Let's see if I can get some of that uh, uh, that sequence of feelings.  First, sort of as though you're...and I gather that the first one is a fairly positive feeling...as though maybe you're kind of creating a poem here...uh, a song without music somehow but something that might be quite uh, quite creative, and then the, the feeling of a lot of skepticism about that.  Maybe I'm just saying words, uh, just being carried off by words that I, that I speak, and maybe it's all a lot of baloney, really.  Uh...and then a feeling that uh...perhaps you're almost learning a, a new type of experiencing which would be just as radically new as for a blind person to try to make sense out of what he feels with his fingertips.
 I gather that another way of putting some of this is that...you can't have any assurance in your feeling of how to evaluate this, maybe it's sort of creative, maybe it's really something that's no good, maybe it's just words, maybe it's a brand new experience, and what, what value to place on it, is that...does that make any sense?
 Good deal of uncertainty as to whether you're going about this in the right way, or whether you should try to be more logical or more practical or...and then you find, when you really get here that the things that well up and out of you...a, is that any good?  I mean, is that, does this poem have any meaning?
 Seem to have lost any purposeful attempts to kind of figure out each uh, problem.
 M-hm.  
 M-hm.  At least you feel you have sort of taken care of each problem  one way or  another.  M-hm.  
 Sort of a deep questioning as to what am I doing with a self that isn't, isn't pushing to get things done, solved?  
 M-hm.  Don't feel at all sure, but you do know that you somehow have a real, a real fondness for this poem that is yourself. Whether it's the way to go about this or not. You don't know.
 After all, be practical...
 It just couldn't quite be real or significant...in the world as it exists...and yet, uh, somehow you get, uh, and awful kick out of thinking that, out of feeling, as I get it, that more than thinking, out of feeling that, well, whatever all of the things in you are, at least there's a song in you, is that...?
 You're just composing the music.
 You don't make progress just by composing music.
 Maybe you do.  But at this point, you can't hardly believe that would be the way to make progress.
 Maybe all of this, even the part that I get such a lift out of is just fooling myself.
 So that uh...you feel that fragile thing...is something that has a lot of reality.  That you're not kidding about.  Not kidding yourself about.  But whether it offers anything that you can live by, that you can take outdoors with you...that's a question.
 Sounds almost as though you were saying that that is a very real part of you.  But whether that could be exposed to the gaze of the world, and so on...that brings up a pretty difficult question.
 Almost a...
 M-hm.  Almost a, fears you'd have for it or what would happen to it within yourself.  Isn't it just kind of a temporary think within yourself?  It really, uh, is there enough to it...to uh...
 So from your reading as well as from speculation, you know a number of different ways of going about this, a number of different things you might be doing; and why aren't you doing them?  They might be uh, they might be helpful.  Yet, just why are you going about it the way you do.  I take it, that's the question.
 In other words there's the feeling on the one hand, well, the climate there is such that nothing else but this kind of thing could come out, and then the realization that, well, dammit, I could do, I could handle it my way I wanted to there.  And yet this is the thing that comes out.
 M-hm.  Then you can start raising those questions and yet, really you're quite sure of the answer there.  
 Kind of feel, that would be quite swell  if you did have such things, hm? 
 I'm not quite clear.  Is it the feeling there, are you saying that, that you wonder how much you're keeping yourself from getting at some of the real things, because these others aren't real?  Or isn't that last implied.  I'm not quite sure.
 M-hm.  It may be this is just sort of a prepa-, I mean things you've experienced so far, is just sort of a preparatory experience for the, for the real things that there are to get at, hm?
 Sorta seemed as though you were able to see it at its worst until you see...
 And then, just able to accept that possibility without uh...
 M-hm.  That at least you felt, even if it did happen, you could probably accept it as something physical and not with the turmoil of feeling in yourself that it created at first.  Is that...?
 Felt as though it wouldn't take you to pieces in the way that it...
 ...did before.
 M-hm.  It would seem as though it was something really organic, not just some horrible event.
 It would seem more like something with a cause and an effect,  uh, not an emotional experience that would tear you in pieces, and not something that would seem to just make Peggy something other than a person almost, is the feeling I get from the way you put it.
 M-hm.  So that the shockingness and the numbness and the deep pity and also the revulsion...is it that all of those were, were in you rather than being uh, primarily concern for her?  Is that uh...is that overstated?
 Like that, something of that quality in it.  M-hm.  M-hm.
 Almost a feeling as though those emotions had to do with you, and that they were ...
 ...Sort of given up trying to control it in your emotions to prevent it from happening ......M-hm...
 M-hm.  That in reality the situation isn't too likely, but I gather that the, the really significant change though is in your own feeling about it even if it should.
 Set aside two times next week?
 Not quite as cold out as it was.
 It doesn't make for smoothness, but I get the feeling of, attitudes of resentment and of being against, and so on that...similar to the ones that have probably always been there, but now they're pushing up through to express them, and yet when they're out, you feel as though they really are out and then you pick up and go on.  Is that...?
 No hangover left is that...?
 A part of the experience is that somehow expressing some of those feelings kind of makes room for the next step, as it were, is that uh...?
 Almost as though it is a part of a flow and flow continues uh... There's more to it than just the expression of these uh, antagonistic feelings.
 Don't think it's part of Dale Carnegie's Book on How to  Win Friends or  maybe to Influence People.
 Seems as though part of the real you is finding expression and the whole experience has nothing whatsoever to do with labels and words, and so on.  It just isn't on that level at all.  Is that uh...?
 M-hm.  
 M-hm.  Somehow the difference that the earlier expressions had to be justified and you could justify them...uh, the present ones are different in that they just exist.  They don't need to be justified.  Is that...?
 Get almost the feeling that it's a...it's a good kind of experience from this, from your feeling about it.  Is that uh...?
 Just relief which doesn't involve any tensions or concern about yourself, or tensions or concern about the person toward whom the feeling is, is directed.  Is that...?
 Feel that what you say here may concern him a good deal, whether he knows it or not.
 You doubt if he could really comprehend the fact that you're working on yourself.
 M-hm.  Sounds as though there, nothing remains to haggle over.  It's been uh, it's just out.
 I'm not quite sure that's clear to me.  There're some elements in you, you think...you're sort of kind of in a bad spot, and you'd like to take a quick look at them, though they were there...I'm not quite clear from what you say whether you feel that would, you'd just like to kind of look at them quickly and they would remain unchanged or...
 M-hm.  And if you took a look at them, they'd be sort of out here in the situation and then that would be alright.
 M-hm.  What could you do that would let them push through the way some of these other feelings have, is that...?
 Just sort of allegiance to the family as a wife and mother...
 ...You just don't feel that very strongly  or very realistically.
 You do things for them to avoid negative uh, results affecting you, and to avoid certain things...you do things for the family.  But not because there's a positive uh, concentration of, of interest on them.  Is that uh... something...?
 Are you saying there that because not so much is demanded, you can give more in that relationship?
 Don't have to do anything, so frequently you want to do.
 Seems as though any knowledge you have of it would be simply as an observer.  Certainly not from the point of view of experiencing it.
 You're saying there that to avoid certain unpleasant feeling within yourself, you undertake certain ways of behaving and so on, but that as far as any real desire to, to feel this allegiance to the family unit, and so on, you don't have it.  At least have very little of it.
 But because the demands on you say 'give a little bit',and so on, but if you really had your choice it would be, for gosh sakes, leave me be.  Don't make any demands on me.   Just let me alone.
 To go and be a hermit, hm?
 M-hm.  As to why you don't have those feelings, you don't see a glimmer.
 M-hm.  You feel as though the concerns are really quite self-centered.  There is a fear as to what might, just what would you do if things...broke up and yet  on the other hand the feeling that, I don't really want to make this family go.
 Just sort of a hesitant feeling, I might be better off if it did break up perhaps, but then a quick feeling of knowing you're not going to take any such step.
 I'm sorry, I missed enough of that so I'm not quite...
 M-hm. That is a very real part of you.  Even though it may not play any part in your behavior, nevertheless it is a part of you that feels, like, just as soon or perhaps would rather break it up.
 So that you went through a period of feeling very much on trial or subject to approval, and that lack of full acceptance was awfully hard to take, but now when that, uh, on-probation feeling, now somehow you don't care too much one way or the other because you've found satisfactions inside.
 You're not sure about the generalization but at least you feel that this marriage for you just has none of the elements of success in it.
 If there has been any possible element, fun hasn't been one of them...
 Think it sounds to me as though you're saying...I haven't done my part, and I haven't met certain demands, but it's not that I feel regretful about that.  I'm not quite sure but that seemed to be in your...
 ...Sort of it isn't only that, that you feel, well, I'm not a good wife in the sense that that is usually understood, but there's also the feeling, that isn't particularly what I want to be either.  I mean I just don't... the fact that I'm not doesn't make me feel inadequate or  as though I've fallen short of my goal.
 M-hm.  So your way of looking at it may conceivably be mistaken but you're simply trying to say how you do feel about it, is that uh...?
 It's sort of as though something had been mounting inside you that makes for a lot of tension.
 ...A little bit of fear, but, but what about?
 What about?
   I guess I'll have to excuse myself.
  If it doesn't bother you, it doesn't bother me but...
   Gives you very little choice.
 It's as though this feeling that something dire is just around the corner, may be a way almost of...may be something that in itself prevents you or makes it unnecessary for you to look at this something or other that you may be hiding from yourself.  Is that it?
 Not a pleasant feeling to feel that doom is just ahead.  Possibly.  
 Some kind of a dire result?
 Perhaps, perhaps this is what you're suggesting, that there might be a possibility that you want this thing that you also dread.  Is that...?
 I get it, you experience an anticipation that's almost a desire, almost a favorable feeling toward whatever this is and at the same time this tightening up of apprehension is also very real in regard to perhaps the same thing.  Is that...
 Are you saying there that it's more anticipation in the sense that something just seems as though it's inevitable, it's going to happen.  Is that the flavor of it?
 Regardless of what it is you feel pretty sure that it does have real significance, in that it really would perhaps open some doors.
 Contains somehow a sense of some very basic forecast of doom or of evil.
 Seems to have nothing to do with, with reality or with your intellect.  And that's one of the reasons it makes you feel it may hide something quite, quite different.  At any rate there, there must be causes for it, reasons for it.  
 Feel as though for the present, at least, you're unable to track it down to...
 When you say it's something that's pretty bad I judge you mean that it's something you really don't like in yourself, but there is this feeling of just intense bitterness, something of a very emotional bitterness.  And it's, it's not turned your way, it's turned out.
" So there's the feeling, ""I've really been cheated.  I've covered that up and seem not to care and yet underneath that there's a kind of a, a latent but very much present bitterness that is very, very strong.‚Äù"
 Almost a dominating kind of force.
 Just catch glimpses of it at times.
 Much stronger and calmer than that.
 You've had feelings of bitterness before but those were something you could turn off and so on, this is rather different in being such a murderous kind of hatred, of such a quiet but powerful sort.
 It sounds as though you sort of feel that perhaps you should turn it in but that you definitely are not ready to.
" This isn't a desire to get revenge for any specific thing.  It's just a very pervasive feeling of, ""I'll pay the world back"".  It isn't at all like yourself as you think of yourself."
 You know you won't carry it out.  But boy, how you would like to make things suffer.
 M-hm.  In other words, it isn't so much what would happen to the object of the feeling.  That really isn't it.  It's that you'd like to let it loose from yourself.
 Vindictiveness, and a murderous feeling.
" Are you saying there that at this point this force just exists. You don't feel ready to say, ""This is my feeling, I am responsible for it"".  Is that the way you mean?"
 I see.  It no more than balances the scale.
" ""I've taken it and now I'd like to loose it on  somebody else""."
 ...I didn't know quite how to finish that.  You'd like to loose it.
 Taken it and now you'd like to give it.  That's more what you mean isn't it?
 This is not anything for me to resolve.  This is something that happened to me and which creates these feelings, period.
" M-hm.  ""I've been gyped and gyped until it's piled up feeling that I'd like to let loose.  Not on someone.  I just feel murderous toward life and what it's done to me""."
" In other words, ""Let me alone because I don't care"" really has the meaning ""Let me alone because I do have feeling about this.  And if it came out it might really hurt""."
 Some patterns seem to fit.
 To hell with taking it all inwardly and being very lofty about it.
 There is a small murmur of that sort.  But that isn't the way you feel about it.  This is not a problem you created or that you are responsible for.  This is something that happened to you.
 Much less awful expressed  
 Now the case of murder is out, it doesn't seem nearly as bad, does it?
 Possible that it might not be as satisfying as it has seemed that it would,  to get back at life.
 Facing this reduces the effectiveness of that.
 Rather the reverse of the proverb in that you seem to be experiencing, there's no gain without some loss.
 I think it's time to call it quits.
 Play a little tit-tat-toe.
 You'd like to do something else today.
 Nothing pulls back and nothing pulls forward.
 You're intrigued by the fact that it almost seems you're trying to touch and feel your feelings here.  And for some reason that you're trying to do that rather than deal with intellectual ideas or verbalizations.
 M-hm.  It's these things that normally you tend to distrust, here you're examining and experiencing and any attempt to even describe at the verbal level what's going on doesn't seem to really quite carry what, what you're doing.  Is that...?
 Something other than ordinarily belongs in words.
 Not only part of the unexplored territory of your life but it probably is of other lives.
 But when you do...I think this is what you're saying...when you do get into one of those really meaningful aspects of experience it just seems as though some type of, somehow orderly process has proceeded it.  Is that...?
 Looking back on certain of these experiences you can see that rhythmic force just sort of leading up to this point that was achieved.
 And you sort of stand off and look at yourself that way in that situation.  It's an interesting process that you're seeing.
 Is it just sort of the feeling, 'something significant is happening'?
 It might sound quite ridiculous if you try to intellectualize it but nevertheless there's a very real conviction that there's the feeling, there's the touching of those feelings, there's a pulsating force that somehow is operative.
 It doesn't seem quite so bad to own it but the notion of doing something about it or going on from there, that doesn't have any particular appeal at this point.
 How in the world could one, could one do anything about such a big and long-lasting thing?
 And one rooted so deep.
 It's been fleeting and it's been infrequent, but there have been times when it seems the whole you is functioning and feeling in the world, a very chaotic world to be sure,...
 A feeling that it wouldn't be safe to talk about the singing you...
 Almost as if there was no place for such a person to, to exist.
 Because that whole you does exist with all your feelings.  Is that it, you're more aware of feelings?
 That whole you somehow lives feelings instead of somehow pushing them to one side.
 I wonder if this will distort your meaning, that from a hard headed point of view, you ought to be spending time thinking through specific problems.  But you wonder if perhaps maybe you aren't on a quest for this whole you and perhaps that's more important than a solution to the day to day problems.
 Sounds as though you were both finding it a more comfortable kind of relationship  and somehow more real even though she's not as dependent.   More perhaps the relationship between two separate individuals.  Is that...?
 That is you can understand some of the reasons why they get so tensed up.  But you also realize that you can't do something about that.  That's their problem.  Is that what you're saying?
 And now you can sort of accept that that's the way they are and the tensions that happen to exist, just as you can also recognize that that tension probably would disappear if each could accept the feelings of the other for what they really are.
 I'm not quite sure that I get that, but that I suppose you feel as though perhaps you haven't gotten very far today.  But that it's just sort of healing it off for a time and we'll come back to it.  Is that...?
 In other words, there may be a little bit of self-protection in the kind of experience today but perhaps that's exactly what should be there because last time was a little hurtful.
 Sounds as though you're expressing quite a, quite a basic confidence that though some of the things are painful, it perhaps almost carry's within themselves the healing that, that will go on.
 If you really have some confidence in them.  Don't try to force it, hm?
 I guess our time is just about up.  Perhaps you'd just like to leave it there for today.
 Chilly out today.
 You don't want to interfere or impose your wishes on what is actually her situation.
 You feel as though there kind of hangs over him certain tensions because of the fact that you're talking with me, even though he suggested it.
 You really feel very, heavily almost the weight of his expectations that this is going to make you over someway.  Whereas in your own feelings you neither expect it to make you over nor do you particularly want it to make you over.
 Are you saying this, that you've, your own hopes involve certain change, that is you hope to have a more steady, sure feeling inside and so on, but that the thing that you are deeply objecting to is that somehow this will change you over into a mold that somebody else has designed, as it were, or somebody else expects.
 Whether you object or not is immaterial.  The point is it's something that couldn't really happen.  A person couldn't change over into somebody else's expectations for him.
 Does that mean that you sense in it a certain flavor of...this is what you ought to be.  Is that what you mean by moral judgment?
 His judgment as to how people should be, how you should be may be absolutely correct.  But even so you feel that negative attitude toward that.
 I felt that was wrong when I said it.
 Is it, sometime you're going to have to, decide that you will adjust to that, to this and that this adjustment is too great to make and so on.  That kind of...
 But in no sense denying the present feeling that it just seems to you as though, well we'd better call it off.  Yet you want to wait to see, see how lasting or what happens to that feeling before you...
 There's one reason you hesitate to act on your own feelings...is that though Peggy might be pleased and perhaps it would solve some of her own problems but not in a way you regard as sound or healthy.
 You feel quite sure she would encourage you to, to leave.  And yet is this it, that you sort of feel that you might be enabling her to avoid an issue rather than solve it?  I'm not quite sure...
 Might seem good but it wouldn't be.
 It would give her a certain amount of relief but the problem which is in her would still remain unsolved.
 That line of thinking makes it a little tough for you to see what course to take.  
 But a real dislike for absorbing the shocks that they let off and wishing to hell, they'd go build their own life without battering you in the process.  Is that...
 It's not very clear.
" Is this anything like it?  In a sense you feel like saying to each of them, ""Why don't you find your own resources within yourself rather than me"".  Is that something like it?"
 You feel that somehow their own inadequacies get taken out on you.
 There's a resentment against their taking out their inadequacies on you but also the feeling that they've got to find the strength with which to build their own lives.
 Getting off into some very vague thoughts there.  But you feel if they like themselves well enough to be themselves and to be satisfied with that, to like it, that's the kind of thing you'd wish for.
 They just aren't friendly with themselves and so you get the brunt of that.  Seems to you that there's nothing much you can do about that situation except to just wish that they were just...
 I gather that you mean that they have the opinion you could change the environment in which they live.
 Actually you don't know  whether you have within yourself any power to change that.  
" M-hm.  There's something in the feeling that the judge is to some extent correct or even righteous.  And the judgments are even in a sense right.  It doesn't seem as though it can be argued about too much.  And yet the whole feeling is, ""But that isn't right""."
 Is it, there's no getting together, no agreement on what are the important values?
 So alright, the judgments are right and they're there and so on and yet this very deep feeling that we haven't, haven't communicated really, this isn't, this isn't what it's all about.
 This isn't the crux of the matter in any sense.
 I'm weighted down a little.  Looks like a lot of work to me.
 Maybe I better take it off of there.
 I'm not quite sure of the feeling there, that is you're going to be pretty much coerced by circumstances into fitting in there in some way.  Is that...
 As though you sort of get bogged down in the computational process, now you're finding out a little more about what the problem is about and probably go ahead and finish the computation, not really because you want to but because after all you ought to come out with an answer.
 I take it you mean by that word that it isn't or it won't be the real thing.  That it's just kind of a cover up.  It'll do.
 Would that be equivalent to saying this, that you feel you've got to work out a solution for you, which isn't a real solution, in order to provide a situation in which Peggy can come to a real solution of her difficulties.  Is that...?
 It has some pretty deeply opposing feelings in there.  On the one hand the feeling that you want to get away, to pull out from under this, to get out.  That's the honest thing.  That's the thing you really feel.  And on the other hand the feeling that you don't want to smash people, hurt Peggy or to do something you shouldn't do.  Therefore you'll forget all this first, but it kind of refuses to stay forgotten.  
   You say I'm not being very helpful.  Hardly fair to have you look at your feelings, hm?
 Really quite busy pushing out the feelings, keeping them from flowing in.
 Yeah, that's what I mean.
" I get two elements there, that is, first of all a question, ""Isn't there any resolution to this which would permit some place for my feelings as well as for the welfare of the others involved?"".  And then the other question being a feeling of a desire to search yourself.  That is, that you want so much to get away from all this.  There's a reason for that.  "
 Feel as though what you want to do points in one direction, and what you feel you ought to do points in another.
 No particular fun to be pulled two directions.  
 That's the kind of thing you wish she could achieve and you, you feel quite responsible for seeing that at least she has the opportunity to achieve it.  Is that...?
 You don‚Äôt want her to be left with a feeling which will carry into and spoil her own marriage.
 You can explore all of these various avenues of implications, but if you come back to an honest look at your own feelings, it seems as though that's so very strong about wanting to get out from under.
 M-hm.  Kind of rough going and you feel it should be, whatever takes place should be deep.  And yet here I don't take the responsibility for guiding that.  And you're fearful of taking it on yourself.
 Don't want to.
" M-hm.  Really more the feeling toward me, ""You ought to take this over""."
 Feel really quite deeply resentful that I don't......take it on.
" ""To hell with being responsible for my feelings today.  I don't want to look at them.  I don't want to be responsible for them.  Somebody else can do it""."
 Any of that knowledge doesn't prevent you from feeling the really I should take that over.
 Nothing ladylike in that feeling.
 Could be that one seeks help primarily to bolster what you want to do anyway.  Is that...?
 The question that runs through your mind is perhaps if one did what one really most deeply wanted to do, that would be therapy and you wouldn't apologize for it.  Is that...?
 Unless one assumes that therapy is to sort of, sort of cut everybody to a certain mold or a certain kind of mold of morality and proper behavior or something of that sort.
 If I'm to educate you then by God I better take the responsibility for it and no fooling.
 If he's right, then it it's up to my counselor to really  tell me where to go.  And why doesn't he get busy and get on the job?  Well, it's my responsibility to say our time is up.  
 Feel you're sort of bogging down?
 Kind of troubling to find that instead of better, here you're worse.
 What you're saying a moment ago, were you saying that some of the same feelings and conflicts and issues perhaps are there, but that they're sharper now, more definite.
 You mean there's been flaws in the way you were organized before, but at least you saw things through.  Now you see, sometimes in small ways but at least the significance is that right now you'd rather dodge some issues than to meet them at all.
 Almost as if you're now telling yourself: since I don't quite know where I'm going, I don't have a clear course of action, why, how can I be expected to do these things. Is that...?
 I sort of get the feeling that perhaps you're saying: if I had some plan to sort of take care of some of the external aspects, then okay, I could carry on this kind of thing here, but it would be in sort of a balance.  Is that what you mean?
 They're vague, and you realize they're not...
 ...too clear cut.
 You'd sort of like to be pretty sure at this time what you're building on.
 And not to fool yourself with...
 You feel as though at the present time your structure is more impaired or less organized perhaps than it was when you came in, and the rebuilding of any newer type of structure to take its place hasn't really gotten underway.
 You feel as though, so far, it's kind of a taking apart, a breakdown process rather than anything on the other side.
 M-hm.  You're saying there that in effect that this piece by piece breakdown business isn't comfortable or pleasant, but one thing you're quite sure of is that you don't want to be back at the starting point.
 You want something other than that to come out of it.
 If you could get a job or something like that, that would sort of make up for some of the, some of the discomfort that is connected with the breaking down process.
 When you can't...
 You mean it isn't pleasant at all to find yourself doing things that you would class as neurotic or dodging or what not, to know that you're doing that, still find yourself doing it, I mean, you face the fact that you're not operating in the way that you would like, isn't pleasant.
 M-hm. You mean you've got certain ways in yourself and then sort of come to a stop, as though for the present you're unable to go on into, what you‚Äôre sure is, must be, there.  But right at the moment, you just feel just as though you're marking time and is isn't good.  You don't like it.  Is that something...?
 It isn't marking time with an alertness to go ahead, but more marking time to keep from going ahead?
 I wasn't quite sure how you meant about this breakdown.
 For a time you were really working in the field of those intangibles and then somehow you lost contact with that self.
 But you have, I take it, a pretty strong feeling that it's...the important thing lies somewhere in that realm.
 What are you chasing cobwebs for...
 Seems awfully shadowy and sort of dubious when you get out in the white light of day.
 Almost 'what are you doing out there in that other realm?'
 It may not seem like the twentieth century to you, but when you get hold of it, you're pretty damn sure that it is something very real.  The kind of thing, I take it, where you don't need someone else to tell you, 'Yes, that's important, you know that's important.
 M-hm.  You're saying there has always been kind of a rift between the real experiencing of yourself, and the way you operate to get along in the world.
 All this structure that they live by is really sort of a shell, not really the real thing.
 That's far, far back in your own experience.
 You resent them, but there is a feeling that they can't touch you, is that...
 You can think about this essence of you, this thing you're in contact with sometimes, and lose and contact again, and it seems very real.  It's the part that outside things can't touch much.  Yet, along with that, there's the feeling that still and all I've got to be practical.  I've got to adjust to the world.
 I'm not quite sure there.  Is this a wish, a hope that perhaps that private self could really operate in a way that it wouldn't have to limit itself, sacrifice itself, and so on.  But never the less could operate on that basis in the world.  Is that...?
 Do you mean that at least you don't want the kind of, quote, good adjustment, that means lopping off a part of yourself and bending yourself to fit something, or dulling your feelings.  You'd like to be able to live in a freer way, I take it, a way that's more related to this private self.  This may very possibly mean that you're still in a sense being opposed to the world in many ways.  Does that catch...
 That you'll have to think over.  I'm afraid times up.  Let's see, we don't have a date in here at this time.
 So that there isn't such a question about your feeling as to the fact that for you these vaguenesses represent the real way of going ahead.  But you wish you knew why you chose that kind of path.  Is that what you mean?
 So that there was at least the first rather sharp, rather concrete working out of different problems in regard to your relationship with your daughter.  And in one sense, you might almost have stopped there, had you not in that process, come across certain feelings in yourself, certain unanswered elements which begin to have this quality of vagueness.
 Would this be something like this, that at first it was the feeling that the problem is the relationship with your daughter, but as time had gone on, the problem is yourself.  I mean that you really are wanting to...feeling dissatisfied with yourself, and wanting to deal with that.
 So that your feelings say that the way you're going is real, it's alright, but since it seems as though a lot of progress was made with the problem outside of yourself by crystalizing it pretty clearly, maybe these vaguenesses have got to become quite specific if you're to achieve what you want...
 ...in regard to yourself.
 Maybe?  You guess, you're not sure.
" To put in terms of the illustration, you feel very strongly that in this room you don't want to deal just with the word ""ouch"", or with what somebody else thinks about whether or not the pinch hurts you and you want to deal with the experience that went on inside your skin when that happened rather than label it experience.  But then, you wonder too, but is that right, or should I be dealing labels and what people would think about them...almost, it seems to me, asking, am I right to deal with these experiences that go on within my own skin."
 You're in search of a greater degree of certainty in yourself, and maybe that isn't possible, you don't know.
 That doesn't fit.
 If you can discover that, that inner force within yourself, something that can be believed in, if you can get acquainted with it, and know it, you don't think, well that would be it.  You wouldn't have to talk about problems or...
 Maybe it's just an escape from dealing with your problems, but somehow you're trying to rely on the feel of experience, Is that...?
 You've been strong on logic and specific knowledge and definition and so on  This hardly seems like you, to be talking in such vague terms.
 You really think you like this way of approach, because it seems as though you really are trying to proceed in an orderly fashion.  Yet it‚Äôs quite a different kind of orderliness that demands a new vocabulary, a new way of expressing yourself.
 In many ways it seems kind of damn mysterious and peculiar, and yet you like the kind of, not all of you likes it but, in general you like the kind of thing that has taken place in you because it does seem to be leading perhaps towards more peace or at-homeness with yourself.
 You're very sure that some of those are going to have to be dealt with, but in their own time or in your own time.
 After you've gotten to the point where you can know yourself, use yourself, have some control over yourself perhaps, okay then...
 Isn't me, this...
 Someone with whom you're becoming acquainted perhaps?
 I guess you feel it isn't a very close relationship yet.
 Sort of, something sort of separate somehow, is that...?
 It seems as though you've gotten out of contact with it by dealing primarily with some of the labels.
 No fun, hm?
 And you go through this long and laborious task and yet there's the conviction that the real answer is just the essence of simplicity.
 Somewhat contradictory feeling that it can't be worth anything and why should I impose it on a person who has other things to do.    And yet, the conviction too that this is something extremely important, very important for you to continue.
 Maybe somebody wouldn't understand, maybe I don't get it, but it is so important that others, must, should, feel its vitality and its depth.
 Basically you're feeling there that something is bound to come of this.   Is that...?
 It may drift on into the future for a long, long time.  Wonder if I'll get bored.
 Although it may sound vague, you know quite surely within your own experience that an interview like this one is a preparation for something that's going to come.   You don't know what but...
 Kind of a melody or a theme or has it's own...
 ...rhythm.
 This is sort of an antiseptic precaution, as it were.
 For what you know will come in the way of breaking out and release.
 I gather you mean by that: it has it's own value, it's not just marking time or anything like that.
 It's to conserve what...
 ...there is.
 They have a real relationship to this deep inner thing that somehow is going to emerge from all your effort and all that.
 Maybe just like that artistic experience.  This is a way of looking and looking again, and looking more deeply until things that you never would have seen on the first look are discovered to be really there, and that also in more of a unity.
 Would this catch some of that: that perhaps it arrives at a point where there's less of what it is supposed to be, and more of what is...
 You've really come to accept that and see something of its potentialities.
 Time is about up?  Do you want to say what days you'd like to make it next week?
 Everybody'd better look out?
 There is this...feeling of blaming others and feeling that that's pretty much deserved, too.  But then there's somewhat deeper level of concern that you don't believe you're willing to really face up to some of the basic difficulties.  It's alright to play around the edges a bit, but you feel that's about as far as you'll go.  
 Your own feelings would be pretty sure in saying, it has been and is a fake, should never have been, period, finish.  But you don't know whether you have what it takes to live by that feeling.  And neither are you quite sure whether you have the right to be and do what you wish, or do you owe something to another.
 Seems as though the thing that is stirring within you is more 'I want to get away, be out on my own, be free'.
 And that seems to you more like something you should have experienced a long time ago rather than now when it makes you feel as though, 'my God, that makes me look immature! '  Somehow that's a very upsetting feeling;  
 Don't really know exactly what feelings occur at that point.  You just know that...they come surging up;  
 You feel that you do feel sorry for yourself.  
 It just never was a part of your adolescent experience to grow away from father and as you look at it, it seems to have a good deal of reality that that's what you're doing now.
 Yeah.  It isn't the whole thing.
 Sort of saying, I want to live my own life.  Is that... something you experience?
 Your whole feeling is perhaps a little more akin to that of a child who might think in regard to his parents, I see you not all-wise or all-good.  I do feel disillusioned.  You're just not so important to me, neither so important to do things as you wish, nor even to do things against you in order to be sure of your interest in me.  Is that a little bit...?
 A very strong resentment, but you feel it's kind of a childish thing in its immaturity.  
 'I feel this way.  I don't know what one does about that or how it could be handled.  I'll just wait and...'  
 Guess you'll just have to sort of wait to see what develops.  Is that...?
 Yeah. M-hm.
 What is the next phase of the riddle, sort of is just a little bit‚Ä¶
 You‚Äôve just come to feel that the ready made things, the sort of things you could say‚Ä¶ well, those you‚Äôve come to doubt. I mean, you‚Äôve‚Ä¶if the things that you feel really develop within yourself, somehow they‚Äôll have more significance for the future.
 M-hm. And I understood, as you said a moment ago, it‚Äôs also that only a certain amount of that new kind of thing can perhaps be said at any time.
 So that this disturbed and unpleasant kind of feeling that's associated with the dreams at least makes you feel that something is happening, that you are somehow loosening up and that there is motion at any rate and...
 M-hm.  A sort of loosening up and sort of disagreeable.
 Guess we'll have to stop for today.
 And I think I understand quite clearly the aspect of it that you realize it isn't something intellectual and so on.  It doesn't particularly demand there that the important elements of it have much to do with that aspect of living.  And when you say you sort of stand off, a sort of watch-fulness which you regard as unnecessary, I gather that you mean, you could sort of let yourself experience this thing without necessarily at the same time standing off and watching the progress, is that...?
 I see.
 M-hm.  I see.
 M-hm.  That this is sort of necessarily a very individual kind of experience and you don't have to have some of the concerns about it...is that...?
 M-hm.  I see.  Comparisons and so on.
 M-hm.  That is, thinking over some of these things has helped you, I gather, both to fully accept the feeling of resentment against any process that would just turn out carbon copies.  And has also helped you to realize that this isn't that kind of process.
 M-hm.  Both the feeling that you can't possibly come out of this a carbon copy of anything, and also that the sort of unique material you bring to it...alright.  So you do.  You will develop in terms of that.
 It's part of this unverbalized experience.
 But somehow it really feels as though it's alright...in process.
 That it is really quite intriguing to observe yourself as this goes on.  And also intriguing to be yourself as it goes on, hm?
 M-hm.  There is a relationship, that is you can feel a relationship with that, in a sense, unknown group, a relationship that has meaning, and yet is by no means a relationship of identity but more of a feeling that it is quite alright for you to be an entirely separate and unique person in that experience.  Is that it?
 You feel it must be hard on him and yet it sounds as though you were getting a certain amount of kick out of that too.
 Sort of an approval, and that that must be pretty shaky.  That there is the possibility of that being sort of withdrawn, I mean, it would always be a shaky thing.
 As I get that, you mean you're not here for approval.
" You've found a place to ""compose your own music""."
 M-hm. There's a contradictory quality of being deeply personal, and yet definitely impersonal.
 That perhaps from your point of view it didn't work for him.  Is that...?
 Are you sort of approaching the notion there that perhaps different people use it in different ways, or different roles?
 More just raising the question of yourself, well, what do you mean by success, and you...
 I gather what you mean by that is that as you mull that over, you realize that...perhaps you would be willing to define what...success would be for him.  I mean...
 ...in terms of carbon copies.
 Feel that maybe with some people, it might be sort of shattering to get through that armored surface.
 M-hm.  Feel that it's very realistic in one sense; their answers are adapted to the reality of the situation.  And yet somehow there just, you have the feeling which is awfully hard to put into specific words, that they have lost touch with...or out of touch with a different type of reality, somehow.  
 That may somehow, that may convey something of the difference you sense there, the difference between living life even accordingly to a philosophy and so on, between that and somehow loving life, being deeply immersed in it.
 I see our time is up.  Didn‚Äôt mean to cut you off in the middle of a sentence.
 Well, she did pretty well. Let‚Äôs see. Next week‚Ä¶
 Once a week? Okay. Alright. It‚Äôs quite okay. And if you should want an appointment Friday, assume you could have it if you wanted to phone in next week.
 Okay.
 Beautiful day out, isn't it?
 Cold.  M-hm.
 Sort of both tracked it down, and also found further meaning.
 M-hm.  Sounds as though the purpose or the direction of your little game is to be more aware of some of the feelings that were in some of these situations.  Feelings that you really weren't aware of particularly at the time.  And that at least two of those, that is...this feeling, you're hardly sure it was there.  That you'd better be prepared for the end of the world.  And the other feeling being that...the way I'm behaving is somehow a little unreal, a little false.  It isn't quite the real thing.  Does that catch the thing there?
 M-hm.  Just seems like chance that you would happen to focus on or think about those particular things.
 M-hm.  And it was quite a meaningful experience in which, as I get it, perhaps the sharpest element of it was not even the feeling that, as if I lost my father, but the feeling that, how did I get trapped into feeling that, or how did it come about that I substituted him?
 Sort of telling yourself, what do you mean by being such a child and by seeming to need the father figure whom you do feel disturbed about when you lose him.
 Don't you know you're grown up?
 M-hm.  Almost scolding yourself that you could have felt something like that underneath the surface without even having known that that was being built up.
 M-hm.  I'm not quite sure that I get all of it.  I'd like to see if I do and you can correct me.  That is, that you sense the relationship, I mean it's that vague kind of thing, between that feeling of loss of father, and the way  yourself for that feeling.  And perhaps the earlier, more childish loss of God.  And that too, both those tie in somehow with the feeling of sort of preparing for the last judgment and you'd better be in as good shape as possible even with your clothes on in order to meet it.  Does that catch something...?
 It's not a feeling in an adult, something like that you had when you were a child, it was that childish feeling all over again.
 In other words, this situation isn't that I see this as important, and want to portray it or what not.  But it's almost that you did not see its significance but that somehow something in you sort of impels you to bring it out.
 It's a very real thing just to look at it...
" ...from that angle.  And these weren't thoughts that you ""thought"" in that sense.  They were thoughts that ""moved"".  Thoughts that moved in you rather than that you sort of consciously directed yourself toward.  And yet they did crop up when you'd been kind of wrestling with some feelings about father relationship."
 M-hm.  They lead to no immediate or specifically helpful goal.  Is this part of a song?
 Okay. 
 M-hm.  M-hm.  
 Sort of loosening up that means being more, more alive in yourself, more...
 M-hm.  Sort of the feeling that if you can sufficiently broaden out this aliveness to an awareness of what comes through and what you experience, then somehow that is the important thing, not the things that happen to come through from the tie-up, is that...?
 Are you saying there that it is perhaps important that they be able to come through, but the content of what comes through isn't the particularly important thing, is that...?
 M-hm.  There may be a lot there that doesn't come through and that really doesn't make any difference.
" That is you get almost to the point of kind of reproaching yourself for not...hooking some of this up more logically, or being less vague about it.  But then each time, ""no, no, it may be vague, but this is what you mean"".  The rest might have a shade of artificiality or unreality to it if you try to give a nice intellectual difference."
 That part I gather is more than intellectual, huh?  Something you really feel, hm?
 Sometimes some of your feelings even surprise you a little, but there is this ... much more than a sense that you can't do much about her problem is the sense that it is her problem, and you're content to let it rest that way.
 And somehow that has improved the...guess the relationship has improved.
 You haven't been working at it.
 As I get that, it's the feeling that she looks upon you as the person whom she might respect or whose attitudes might make a difference to her, not because you're her mother, but because you're another person.  Is that...?
 Seems to you that you've been together so long and she's just discovering that I'm a personality.
 M-hm.  In regard to her, there are certain things you can overlook?  Is that what you mean there?
 M-hm.  That part doesn't become magnified and very important to you.
 Didn't find it fatal to skip an appointment?
 M-hm. You thought you were jabbing people a little and whether it has anything to do with not...with not having one appointment, you just don't know.
 But you're pretty sure it was nothing specific to the person cause you just do it to anybody.  And you did get a kick somehow out of these jabs of needling.
 M-hm.  Something sort of telling you to continue.
 M-hm.  See if I understand that, 'cause it sounds a little contradictory.  As though on the one hand, you sense an improvement in yourself, a kind of easing and more comfortable in a number of...
 ...number of ways.
 M-hm. And at the same time, you feel as though you sense even more sharply deep flaws in yourself, your inadequacy, and so on and so on. And yet the kind of overall picture is that except for something definite in the way of steps or action or plan, where it's demanded of you, you'd be quite content to stay as you really are functioning these days, is that...?
 Have a feeling that you have a better notion of what is weighty and what is not, and that...M-hm.
 But you like quite well the fact that for instance you can let out unpleasant attitudes without it being a matter of great tension and distress and so on.
 And yet I gather when you sort of stand off and look at yourself, that you feel that, oh, but you have such a long ways to go, and so much of your behavior is neurotic and so forth.  And I'm trying to understand this... I think you're trying to understand this too...what sounds like a double feeling, and really seeming so much more comfortable with yourself on the one hand, and in another sense, so much more critical of yourself.
 More that along with this sensing and experiencing of maturity which you like, is a much sharper awareness of all the things you feel and do.  A lot of those you feel need some change.  Is that it?
 M-hm.  That you're more keenly aware that there is a part of you that somehow doesn't want to face the reality of life, is that...?
 There is, maybe is a keener recognition on your part that this part of yourself want to face certain aspects of life in the sense of doing something, taking some kind of action, doing something about it.
 You seem to have quite a deep sense that things within you come in their own time and at their own rhythm, is that...?
 M-hm.  It makes you eager to achieve the goal, and yet not impatient to achieve the goal.
 You sense much more all of these unspoken communications, but that one particularly strikes you.
 Not so much a day of achievement as it is some other quality, hm?  .
 Feel kinda good to realize that her plan sometimes, her intellectual notion as to what was going to happen went awry in the situation.
 Sort of accepted more in yourself when you found that she'd had the same experience, too.
 It's important that you just kind of wait for something to move instead of you trying to move it.  Is that...?
 Even almost have some kind of inner wisdom that warns you against that kind of a...pathway.
 Don't feel any of that gentle impelling toward doing that kind of thing.
 And you feel that in some way that's been communicated to him.
 M-hm. In a sense then it's been wise to follow your inclination there just because it's...perhaps focuses on the thing that you would, anyone would have to come to eventually.
 There's just a lot you don't know about it, but you do know that this is a getting ready and preparing for something.
 From what direction it seems or what it'll be, you're content to wait and see;  .
 Let's see.
 I see; 
 A sort of pulling away from this whole thing at this moment.
 M-hm.  Let's see if this is a little closer to it...the feeling being that if I come in here, I may find myself doing something about this something, and at the moment I'm not sure whether I want to.  It would be very comfortable to say, well, things are pretty good, and let's not bother with that.  Is that...something like it?...
 M-hm.  I get it.  By no means a one way feeling.  That is, it's...
 Coming holds the possibility of opening up some of those areas, of doing something about them, and that's what you want.  At the same time it's what you don't want. .
 From that impelling force, such as even things like...the desire to go back to bed, and sleep more, and so on, with sort of a notion, now, here, that is neurotic; you don't, really, you're not really that desperately tired.  There's a feeling that you ought to explore that, do something about it.  At the same time, a tendency not to.
 Nothing happens, hm?
 M-hm.  
 As I understand there, it's the feeling that you ought to be doing something about some of this makes you feel, alright, that's a symptom, but...I could begin anywhere.  Is that...? Or I could begin anywhere if I really wanted to.  Maybe that's more the sort of thing.
 M-hm.  That is actually exploring a thing like desire to go back to bed might quite conceivably lead to some channel of action, of further understanding and so on.
 That isn't too clear or too specific, but you have this feeling there that the cause there somehow is the feeling that: I'm just not the kind of person I could believe in or have confidence in.
 No?
 That isn't...
 ...the feeling there.  Alright.
 That is quite far off the beam, because you really do believe in yourself.
 M-hm.  But you do feel quite strongly that's one thing that it is not, at any rate.  That is, it is not a lack of belief in yourself, I mean, you really do believe in yourself, and that you have the stuff and...
 ...that you have something to contribute, hm?
 Just a quiet firm belief in yourself.
 That you can say that the base of all is the sexual frustration and so forth.  But what good does that do you is the question that really hits you then. 
 I'm not sure I get that.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  M-hm.  Feeling that somehow the only solution to this kind of issues is to deal with and work with the things that you don't now know.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  And it's all potentially in good working order.
 Even though one may be completely baffled at the time, on how to do the untangling which seems necessary.
 So tantalizingly close.
 You almost have it in your grasp, or almost understand.
 It may be frustrating to feel that you almost have it and not quite; and yet there's a deeper confidence that...it will emerge, it'll come, with or without fireworks.  .
 They feel so nearly in place at one moment and then seem to fall apart...and...
 There's a feeling that it can't quite all go together, 'cause some of the pieces aren't there.
 Haven't been discovered yet.
 So that seemed to you like certain, another indication of the fact that perhaps you were loosening up more .  But it also brought the very deep feeling that...the answers that you're seeking in this area aren't verbal answers.  They're something within your own experience.
 You don't mean morally shocked.
 M-hm.  At any rate, when you...when you hit one of these things that's very real, it seems as though it affects all of you, your whole nervous system, your whole organism.  Almost as though it was creating new channels.
 Something that just happens, not a product of thinking about it, something.  M-hm.
 That each one of these pretty vivid experiences brings a certain amount of fearfulness with it.
 Fact that you can cope with them and assimilate them and so on...is another evidence of the basic stuff within yourself.
 Almost the feeling perhaps that you're strong enough to broaden and change.
 Doesn't quite name the feeling as it exists in you.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  M-hm.  There was a real resentment at any change coming...
 ...from...outside.
 Well, you may.
 Well, I seem to have a terrible cold today.  I hope I don't give it to you.
 Just mad about every aspect....
 I'm not quite clear on this.  Because something routine would be more...
 M-hm.  Rather than to really let these feelings out seems almost too much.  .
 M-hm.  Blocked, hemmed in, frustrated.  Comes closer to being tears of anger and frustration rather that...feeling bad.  .
 So much tension and so much talk, but the talk doesn't seem to do any good or have any point.
 If I understand you right, that's one of the reasons why even talking about it is difficult perhaps.  Seems like more words, is that‚Ä¶?
 M-hm.  This is what goes on on the surface, but it seems as though the things that really matter are the attitudes under the surface.  Is that...?  .
 If I get that, changing to meet someone else's requirements...that doesn't represent a solution.
 Mean by that that you feel that perhaps you should change in the way someone else wants...and try to do that before rejecting that as a road to solution?
 Thought you didn't want to continue here.
 Then I was really quite wrong before then, because in your own mind, and in your own thinking, you feel that the need for rational choices and decisions on your own part and perhaps, a very important one, make it wise to continue therapy.
 So what you were feeling was: Okay, I give in.  Now do you think you've won anything?
 But what you said was: Alright, I'll give up therapy.  That something of the difference between the...?
 M-hm.  You say that it's...a double burden has gotten added there.  I mean, that meeting the issues of therapy itself is tough going, and costs plenty in terms of psychological struggle and so on.  And then to have the added feeling that that's being judged as no good, and not worth while, and not working out the way it's supposed to...that makes almost too much, is that...?
 M-hm.  Even taking feelings at their fullest, they never really meant that.
 M-hm.  Then you can see how, if he felt that quite specific goals were the aim, and doesn't see those being achieved, that would be upsetting and disturbing to him.  .
 You feel annoyed with yourself that somehow you get sucked in and involved in that and...and struggle with him on this intellectual level, is that...?
 M-hm.  When you know, within yourself, that that's not where the issues are.
 For you to verbalize about his rigidity and tenseness and so on, just doesn't do a damn thing any more than his verbalizing about your faults.
 M-hm.  This gets you feeling that it's almost a cheap substitute outlet.
 M-hm.  That your procedure has been sort of hurt yourself in order to show them.  But it doesn't seem very...very really satisfying way.  Think I'm going to have to call it a day now.
 Kinda shocked at that?
 Nineteen hours looks big one way  and like quite a small proportion another way.
 Several kinds of things were festering, hm?
 You mean last time?
 Is this...I am a little curious about that, and not sure that I catch it.  Is this it?  That if you had sensed in me...any feeling that...well, you're frustrated, but I'm really fine, or you're frustrated but...I really feel good about...something or other, that that would have blocked you?  Is that?
 You could take it then.
 M-hm.  I think I get it now a little more clearly.  That is that...the realization of your resentment later at, at just that little intrusion, as it were, is part of what makes you feel that if there had been anything in this situation to really contradict your total feeling of frustration, why...the interview might have gone very badly.  But this, but the whole...almost the whole feeling of the thing was your own complete feeling of frustration at that time.  Is that...?
 Yeah.
 M-hm 
 Just to leave that question open.  
 This thing of, when you realized that characteristically with other people you form a kind of an open, generous, giving kind of relationship, it naturally makes you ask, well, then, why not at home...in consideration of that, if you see causes why it is different; but it made you realize more sharply that at home, some of that relationship has just been...using weapons on each other.  Is that...?
 Might just as well be bashing in yourself...
 More civilized and possibly therefore even more...
 ...destructive.
 As long as you're so busy using weapons, you don't have to...look at some of the real problems underneath.  Is that what you...?
 M-hm.  That is you're thinking maybe you'll have to raise the question in practice, if I lay aside this combativeness, this weapon, this excuse, will it make it easier, more likely that I get the real issues, is that...?
 Seems worth an experiment, anyway.
 That is, as long as you see it as a problem kind of existing out here which has right and wrong answers, then it seems as though you have to throw yourself in to work on that.  But when it seems as though...this is a part of her life pattern and his, then it seems as though the relationship they make and build must be something in their hands, not yours.  Is that...?
 Sort of...sounds as though you had experienced a sharper differentiation between your life and hers.  That is, you...yes, at times, [have] been tempted to [move] right in to the involvements of her life, but more and more there has been the feeling that that is her life, and you really mean that.
 Sort of an acceptance of the limits of what you can do in relationship to her.
 You experience that as just sort of an extension of the same principle that that is hers and you're quite limited in what you can do about that relationship.  .
 Not that you're completely opposed to words...
 ...Just that you do not regard them as in themselves the way in which, as a tool with which you can change people.
 You have some awareness of what they are and you could intellectualize about them, but to verbalize about them in any real or meaningful sense, no, that's not yet.
 Like to sort of try yourself out on that and see what kind of results if any it does...
 ...bring.
 You're not trying to be moral or righteous or...but you'd like to try it to see what it does to your own inner feelings.
 Almost this, isn't it?  You're not doing it because you want to be good, but you want to see if laying aside that weapon might bring you more face to face with yourself.
 Okay.  Think I mentioned I'm going to be out of town the rest of this week.  How about...
 That's if I understand your feeling there, it seemed as though you are getting better acquainted with yourself and really getting to know yourself as you are, but that where your first statement would seem to sort of contain the overtone of that's pretty bad.
 That isn't quite it.
 No, it wasn't bad.  I mean, what...came to my mind there was this...kind of...of self that we build up.  The...picture we see which...might be quite...post-fact or little off from fact.  And I said that because I was thinking too, that...I wonder if, if I'm...avoiding the unpleasant things of...about myself.  I...I said it because in... in saying it I'm...I felt that the self I was coming to evaluate wasn't doing so badly in my own...concept, you see.  And I would, I'm wondering, am I avoiding the...aspects that...probably aren't...too good.
 Mostly the feeling is, I'm getting acquainted with myself as it really is, though there's just a trace of question there, am I perhaps avoiding knowing some elements of myself that aren't so pleasant.
 Does this at all catch that feeling, that these aspects of yourself which you feel to be difficult seem to you to be things that have perhaps developed, yes, but that they're somehow not the core of your personality.
 You feel completely uncertain about what to do, and yet, it seems as if you do see the situation more clearly, and more clearly in the sense of seeing it all in relationship to your self.
 M-hm.  Let's try to pick up all of that.   the...without giving any more weight to your feelings than that this is the way you feel today, I mean, not tomorrow or the next day...it seems to you today as though separation would be the sensible thing.  But then you find that you feel deeply lacking in confidence that you could get along financially.
 Big bugaboo.
 M-hm.  Sort of it's defeating me and I couldn't make the grade? I mean, was it that...?
 Well, it just sounded to me as though you were almost saying to yourself, why, you weakling, to feel that way. Do you mean to say that you can't...make the grade.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  Then the other feeling that goes along with all this is what you regard as kind of a ridiculous feeling of guilt or wrongness about it as though somehow you are the stronger person of the two and that some considerable share of the burden for the failure would be on you.  Is that...?
 No.
 Okay.
 It's not guilt for what has happened.
 It's the thought of the burden you would carry if you went ahead.  M-hm.
 M-hm.  It might sort of be one way of just again being hard on yourself.
 M-hm.  It's just a little sense of being pushed into this exploration; pushed partly by yourself and partly by the attitudes and questions of others.
 You don't want an answer to those issues that are just in words.  Is that...?
 Is this what you're saying there?  That you could make certain surface adjustments and you could have certain advantages; might meet some of the issues you've just described, and you might even feel somewhat noble in making those adjustments.  But that the possibility of there being a really meaningful relationship...mmm.
 That doesn't seem possible.
 M-hm.  In other words, when you think of even making some of these...what might seem like adjustive moves, you're very much aware of the fact that underneath though, there would still be that basic bitterness that you feel and that would be there and would crop up.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  Yet it wouldn't be out in the open, but somehow or other it would show up.  Crop up.
 As what it is.
 It only shows up here.
 Guess our time's about up for today.
 It's helped.
 As though it hadn't led anywhere.
 M-hm.  Feel that it has frustration, not something else, hm?
 M-hm.  It's running a little more harmoniously.
 I see.  M-hm. M-hm.   Some of the knock has left the thing.
 At any rate you find you're not inclined to criticize yourself, tear yourself apart.  And whether it is good or bad, or just part of a process or what, you're not quite sure.
 It is more of a feeling of freedom?
 There's some sense of real enjoyment or satisfaction mingled in with this feeling of freedom on the other hand is that...?
 That feels kinda good.  
 You tend just a little to question this satisfaction.  Is it that you're escaping from something else?  .
 Big in that as you think it over, it seems more that the sense of satisfaction is a sort of a total process of change that you feel and you move with it.  That perhaps this is a period of kind of piling up resources, sort of preparing for a new movement in change.  Is that...?
 But it really doesn't seem like escape.  Something more positive than that.
 M-hm.  This is no dodge.  This is really a part of you in process.
 But you're just very much aware of a loosening type of change taking place, and intellectually when you can stand off and look at it to see, if...you knew exactly what made the wheels go round, hm?
 Feel that one basic element in what happens is a kind of a confidence that you can feel in waiting and in letting the thing happen within you, is that...?
 If I understand that, is what you talk about or think about...that that doesn't seem to be the clue to it, I mean, very different...
 ...subject matters might still eventually bring the same sort of thing.
 If you can bring yourself into the situation and give the self a chance to exist, to be, that seems to you as though maybe that's pretty close to the essential.
 Almost in the sense that I am willing to try out me.  Is that...?
 Just sort of experimenting with the use of yourself.  .
 Feeling of weariness.
 One of the kind of preparing days?
 M-hm.  Somehow that seems like more proof than you'd had before that the relationship really was...
 ...you didn't have to hold off from any negative feelings...
 ...You just bring 'em out, both of you.
 Feel as though that relationship has really come a long way.
 To a point where you can either of you, I gather, be your real self in the relationship, and that is good.
 It isn't something you've handled well.  It isn't something that you feel will necessarily be proved.  It's something that has a different quality than either of those that is more basically good.  Is that...
 You can hardly see how the relationship could have changed so much for the better within that space of time.
 If you'll really accomplish things another time.  
 What would you like next week?  Monday and Wednesday again?
 Okay.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  In other words, it didn't contain much of the shared exploration of deep problems.  But I gather that for a person who is not too accustomed to talking out their real feelings, it contained something very definite and very genuine and significant for yourself.
 That there's somehow a kind of a reluctance to get the response of the other?
 M-hm. M-hm.  And will interfere with this on-going process.  
 That is, the overtone of feeling that it might be selfish to do this is really something you've carried along from the past. But the real present feeling is that, maybe I can relax and do some of these things rather freely that I would like to do.
 M-hm.  Just that it seems very much that the sense of choosing and freely doing the things you make up your mind to do and so on, and of moving forward and growing, seems to you as though those should have been what you experienced at sixteen, or somewhere in there.
 M-hm.  That is, as though you're experiencing an aspect of adolescence that you never quite had?
 Not very sure how to put that, but you have a sense that that lack of any paternal authority in your own experience somehow left out something important or significant for your own development.  Is that...?
 The situation is complex and the feelings are complex. Maybe had some of these experiences and reactions to authority come as a child or as an adolescent, the picture might have been different, but actually with you, although you now have quite settled opinions against an overstressing of paternal authority, yet somehow your first acquaintance with that and reaction to it was in marriage.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  The feeling of real shock at discovering that actually I'm as competent in the field as...
 ...as he is, or more so.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  A really incredible truth that hits you as it would hit the ordinary adolescent in relation to his father.
 It was easy and not competitive.
 Some sort of deep communication, is that...?
 Something deep about it and something you wouldn't want to give up at all, and yet you feel it's not quite the ordinary relationship between a woman and men her own age.
 Feel there's a real...and a contradictory element there in your feeling of avoiding older men, and yet when it came to the point of marrying one...
 I'm not quite sure I do get that when it's this...you mean, you see...is this what you mean?  That you see certain, certain changes taking place in you and then only afterward do you really see what that was, or what it meant?  I'm not sure...
 I'm a bad girl.
 M-hm.  Think that makes it very clear.  So that you...you may behave in a certain way, and then only later realize that was a step from childhood into adolescence.
 And that is the way that it seems as though it did belong back there somewhere.
 You wait, and let what happens within you happen, and then sometimes as you look back at it, it's quite interesting to see what has happened.
 But there isn't a lot of intellectualizing about it in the process, as I get it.
 You're trying not to re-...to tamper, but to let that rebuilding take place.
 Okay.  Shall I see you Wednesday?
 ...is six dollars.
 But it has to do with this adolescent view.
 M-hm.  That is, you mean when it came out, it was finished, almost.
 That is, when you...I think this is what you think.  When you saw that the competitiveness with her was really a conflict in you, then it sort of seemed to...not dissolve in a sense, but at that same time, or maybe as a part of that...I'm not quite sure...you began really living your own adolescent feelings to some degree.  Is that...?
 You just no longer had to be on guard so much, felt more relaxed, is...?
 No longer had to...no longer found it necessary to feel that apprehension, because it isn't that conscious either.  You just found yourself no longer feeling that apprehension.
 As I get the thread of all that you're saying, you're trying to sort of look back over and get the picture somewhat clearer of the path you've come in regard to yourself, and yourself in relation to Peggy particularly, is that...?
 As I get that, the thing that really carries conviction, the thing that makes you know that for you this is a path of growth, is the kind of thing you have vividly experienced in yourself in that respect, quite apart from how you might intellectualize about it, or what you might think the factors were, and so forth and so forth.  Or what you might think the roots of the difficulty might be.  But you've actually experienced yourself feeling like a young girl growing up and meeting...
 ...some of these issues quite genuinely for the first time.
 Would this catch something of the flavor of that.  That you're not reliving your childhood or adolescence.  You're living it.  And without the feeling of shame that you should be doing so at your age.  Or without anything but the feeling that you're actually living through some of those experiences right now.
 If I get that: it's fascinating to watch it, and yet the watching it is not the important thing.
 M-hm.  So that the fact of latching on to it and seeing it with some clarity, that's just an interesting profit that might not have happened to come along, but the...
 Yeah.  That's the bonus.  That's the way one can kind of think of it.
 Is this the kind of thing that you're saying?  That you know perfectly well that there's that whole area of sexual relationships and so on, that at some point will be...you'll work into it, but that it's...the expression of that is something that's got to happen, not something that can be forced, and that hasn't happened yet.  Is that...?
 The pathway into that has just not so far seemed to open up for you.
 Think that may sound odd, but it really represents a real experience that in some way you're beginning to let yourself work on it.
 When that may come to expression, that's a different matter. .
 Popped up.
 M-hm.  There are times when it is really a shared relationship of feeling, and there are times when it is you, with your feelings.
 No.  You just assumed...
 ...here's a different character at different times.
 That is, just the...quite a little of the feeling tone at this point is, okay I've looked back over this path I've come. And I can move ahead.  And I don't think I'll need your help any more.  But then I gather there is also another smaller feeling...that opposes that by saying that you're a complex person with complex problems.
 Think I get the feeling that in regard to one area, rather important area, you feel, I've gotten the help that I need.  There's still more to do.  This thing will keep on moving.  But...it can move within me without the help of another person.  And that you could almost make the mistake of feeling: so, I'm through.
 And that tearing down and building is in another part of the house.
 M-hm.  It's almost a walled-off portion of the house.
 Might you not regret it later in other words...that you...
 ...if you were satisfied with this remodeling job and the fact that the rest of the place is walled off.  But in case of emergency, that might not be so good.
 You may be fearing some difficulties that aren't there, but still there's likely to be the rhythm of kind of pain, recuperation, struggle and rest...when you get into it.
 Then you'll know the volume has really been closed.
 Wednesday at 2:30?
 And you want to make it just once next week, or do you want me to try to see if we can find another time?
 Yeah.  Okay. I'll save 2:30 time for the following week.
 Did you get a peek at it?
 There is quite a deep feeling along that line...that this is not all me.  It's the situation in which life has placed me.
 That the problem may be to quite a degree situational.  And yet that only thing that you can deal with effectively is the me that is in that situation, is that...?
 As I get this then, situations don't change much, and actually people don't change situations very much.  But that a person in the situation might change.  Is that...?
 So, as I get it, that leads to a certain feeling of determination or inner conviction on your part that...perhaps you can work with the self of yours that's in that situation.  Is that...?
 There is the satisfaction that comes from somewhat more inner comfortableness, but that still leaves the area of...the relationship with others as one that...
 ...you feel you'd like to approach.
 It's clear enough that in your feelings you don't accept it.  In your actions, you...don't find yourself doing anything about it.
 That kind of discrepancy sort of...
 ...is increasingly disturbing.
 Would this be it?  That if your feelings are clear, why in hell don't you behave in accord with them?
 M-hm.  I'd like to see if I get some of the feelings there.  That first there was this feeling of just extreme frustration and real sorrow for yourself, if I understand that right.  And...then the consideration, well, alright, your situation is that, and what are you going to do about it.  And the feeling of absolute uncertainty as to...how you might move or even...even uncertainty as to why you don't move.
 Different pathways.
 But why don't you take any one of them.  That's...M-hm...
 And that's where the mystery really resides...Then this later feeling, which I take it didn't have much...specific content in it, but just the feeling: but I am going to take hold of it.
 One can intellectually discount it if you wish, but even so, it was quite a striking feeling as it occurred.
 If something within you...responded in that way at a time when you thought you were feeling very, very low about it, when you were feeling very, very low about it, that was kind of a hopeful symbol for the future.  Is that...?
 M-hm.  As though some toughly elastic part of yourself can look on and even feel a little smile about some of this.  As though within itself there resided kind of a confidence that...ability to snap back to restore itself somehow.  Is that...?
 M-hm. M-hm.  There's a core of yourself somehow that can stretch without breaking and...still look with a light touch upon both you and life.
 You're not at all sure of the way, but you feel, that all things considered, you want to try and move ahead. 
 What somebody else thinks, you think you know better.
 You're off on volume number two.
 M-hm.  This seems more difficult both because it's closer to the core of you as a cause of things, and also because you're probably going to have to act in some way.
 Kind of a desire for a lead, even if it's a mistaken one.  Even if it's one you wanted to argue against.
 That...
 That might be helpful in getting under way.  Is that...?
 Yeah.  But a little bit of feeling that I know and that knowledge is not being made available for use, even though you might reject some of it.  Is that...?
 M-hm.  M-hm.  M-hm.  Yes, I think I get a little flavor of that.  That is, a realization that somewhere within yourself you know.  Otherwise you'd have no basis for knowing what to argue against or about if I should interpret the situation.
 But also a little resentment that somehow I should...that I'm not contributing more at this point to that process of discovering it.  Is that...?
 In other words, it's possible that the object of that feeling is to a certain extent chance, that it might have been resentment toward yourself, but it happened to come out...
 ...as resentment toward me.
 As I get that, you sense almost the same feeling in yourself that you felt earlier, but now you sense it a little more in its richness and differences, and the meaning it may have for you, and so on.  Is that...?
 It's no longer a thing which is described by pinning one label to it.  It has quite a lot more to it...
 ...than that.  It's a step for yourself as well as being a mild resentment toward me.
 You have a very real basis for feeling quite a lot of troublement and resentment...that it seemed as though...the pieces were kind of fitted together and now they're all loosening up again.  Is that...?
 M-hm.  That is, it would seem as though perhaps though you could say that problem number one is settled.  Now we will just talk through problem number two.  But to even look at this second area seems to involve the same pattern of fear about going ahead, and...unavoidable feelings of resentment that come along, that I don't help more, and the whole thing that you experienced before.  Is that...?
 Well, I get that in the growing that is a part of childhood and adolescence or of childhood and adolescence in therapy...yes, somehow you can sort of make allowances for the pain and for the stress and for a lot of things.  But in this more adult growing that you see ahead of you, somehow that almost seems more fearful because of the growth that has already taken place, or as though, more fearful, I guess in the sense that you can't quite make allowances to yourself for what you go through.  Does that...?
 M-hm.  These feelings...
 M-hm.  That somehow you will have lost a little of the naivete, as it were, with which you could face some of the earlier experiences.  Is that...?
 But a kind of a zest and a wonder to it, and as you look ahead, that looks more frightening than what you've been through.
 What do you want to say about next week?
 Sort of that intellectually there may be no justification for it, but as to your feeling, there's just no doubt that you were as mad as anything to think that he...
 See if I get that.  That his coming was experienced as though it might mean a disruption of or interference with this relationship.  And...you feel that deeply enough that...if you felt quite sure that if he wanted to come back to me for help for himself, that you would really prefer to be shifted to someone else.
 M-hm.  Provoked.
 M-hm.   Sort of...as I get it, the anger that you felt was quite a bit anger at him for the kind of motives that you felt were bringing him in.  Is that...? .
 Kinda like to trace that and be sure and get it.  That what the incident stirred up in you was pretty complex.  And attempt to state that simply wouldn't be quite accurate.  But it seemed stirred up.  That seemed like a convenient excuse for a really...trying to face him with some of the very strong feelings you had toward him and what he was doing.  And then for some reason, that winds up with your feeling sorry for this husband you're attacking.  And then ...
 ...you criticize yourself, what the hell are you doing that for.  He's the person you're trying to attack.
 Is this what you're saying there?  That as that trouble went on, and it has certain satisfaction in pinning somebody to the wall...yet it sort of lost its savor as though, this isn't what this trouble is all about.
 I gave you the feeling that if he were to really look at the basis of his thinking, that it would be quite disorganizing for him.  Is that...?
 What you see as the real danger is that perhaps it is absolutely necessary for him to see himself as right.
 Wish that you were a big enough person that it wasn't necessary to you to hurt him that...
 Feel that his attitudes are really not your responsibility to change, nor do you feel there is much chance of changing him, but...
  M-hm.  That's up...that you're leaving to him, whatever is done about that.  But as for your own view of yourself and the relationship, it's not hopeless.  Just what it is that you need to help you move forward, that you're not quite sure of, but it's there.  That you do feel some confidence in.
 But as you try to feel more clearly in regard to him, you feel quite sure, no, stern isn't the adjective.  More as though it is this heaviness, the laboring, suffering.  Something at least that's akin to the atmosphere in those Russian novels that's hard to put into words, but that applies to him much more than a word like stern.
 Are you saying there that there are sort of...bitter-sweet attitudes toward the tragic element of life that he has?  I don't know whether I catch it or not.
 What you seem to be saying there is that...sure, he has his limitations, and same kinds of faults all of us do, and yet in lots of ways, you feel he's a good person, and that the direction he's moving or would like to move you can approve of, even if you might not agree with.  But on this business of really...you get this feeling that he loves humanity, you'd like to be able to really prove to him somehow the wrongness of that, or that the person who talks like that doesn't really love the people as they exist.  Is that...?
 Feel that maybe it's defense against his real fear of liking people as individuals.  Is that...?
 That's over in the area that he'll have to do something about things, hm?
 Sorting cards?
 Yeah.  M-hm.
 M-hm.  Somehow quite a lot of things just sharpened up by that Q-test.  But as I get it, in this situation, you function along, keeping the dignity of yourself without exposing too rapidly and so on, the negative aspects you might feel within yourself.  And yet taking something like that seems to sort of expose them a little too sharply for comfort.
 Really resist it.
 That is, served a purpose for you, but damned if you like the test.
 Okay.  See you 2:30 on Wednesday.
 Well, that's the very ritual that...it's helpful to know there's something here.
 This way it's kind of a personal insult this time of year anyway.
 That is, there seems to be no doubt in your feeling that you are somehow more sharply aware of what...well, what makes you tick.  But the fact that that may have grown out of things that seems very vague and almost intangible kind of concerns you to a point where you wonder, does this make sense to anybody else?  Is that?
 I gather that...that isn't a crucial question because the experience in you has just been more crucial, but still you wonder, would these words communicate anything to anyone else, and would they seem to be related to life as it is.  Is that...?
 Now if you're really asking that as a question, I could say that you've certainly communicated something to me...that seemed to have a relationship to life, so I...when you...whether the words have done so, I...well, I don't quite know...
 It's a double thing.
 I wonder if I do understand that.  That...you haven't used here the kind of direct and specific kind of communication that you would ordinarily, and that...instead, for reasons I'm not quite clear about, I gather you're not quite clear about, you preferred to talk in vaguenesses which are very much a part of you, very much you, yet not at all like you as you ordinarily function.  So perhaps somehow...
 I get you.  You've found yourself using this...
 ...kind of way.
 Does this approach it.  That you've found that the ordinary words just don't convey your feelings with the sharpness or the delicacy or the reality that you'd like.  And you've found yourself using a language of vagueness which while it may seem vague, conveys more genuinely or more really the feelings that you have?
 You've found this a satisfying type of communication.  But I gather there's been a little feeling of surprise at finding yourself doing it in this way.
 Have I got my feet on the ground anywhere?
 Once in a while we click.  
 Here you find that...
 I'm not that sort of person.
 At least it interests you that they, that the phantasy that seemed so hard to produce when you were more or less expected to...becomes in a sense the medium you choose when you can communicate in any way you want to about yourself.  Don't think phantasy's a very good word there, but...
 Well, did I use that again?
 You feel that's very important.  One reason that you feel you may get to it is the last, that you're so angry with yourself for being overwhelmed by the thought of taking a job or having a job.
 That is, sort of asking yourself, why the hell should I be fearful of, or overwhelmed by the notion of a job.
 That's all the answer you need, hm?
 So that if you're tough enough to stand all you've stood, why is it that the prospect of a job...seems sufficiently fearful. That you know very well you won't be able to go out and get one tomorrow. That somehow you've got to go through a period of getting ready to do that.
 Separation may be a second step, and you feel that would have real value, more than it might seem to have.  But that's not the first step.
 The feeling I get...
 ...through all this is not only have an increased respect for her, but that really you felt as though you trusted her view of it almost more than you trusted your own.
 So that though she is a little less deeply tangled in it than you are, and that perhaps her view of how it would come out is almost something you could rely on.
 M-hm.  Mean if you understand the cause of it better and see it as an involuntary reaction releasing some of the tension without doing anything about the frustration.  Somehow it annoys you that you should have that reaction, but understanding it, you hope perhaps it may change the situation a little.
 Two-thirty then both days unless I hear from you.
 M-hm.  So that in this quite unexpected and very moving and not entirely pleasant experience, the gist of it as I get it, was kind of...in some odd way symbolized around the notion of having your feet on the ground, but the meaning of it was...if you get a job, then you have assumed full responsibility for yourself, and for what's happened to you in the past?  That is, I didn't quite...
 Seems as though that responsibility is past, and present, and future.
 M-hm.  This was too direct an experience that walked up and hit you to stop much to feel about it.  You were right in it.
 Wouldn't mind taking a chunk out of somebody.
 Anybody, I gather.
 Whether it is there, the feeling of kind of meanness toward other  people right now that is quite real...
 And you feel quite immature.
 This it?  That the way I am is not my fault, and it seems very unfair that I should have this experience of having to take responsibility for myself.  Is that...?
 No? 
 That if I am responsible, then in a sense I am also to blame.  Is that...oversimplified?
 I guess that  too without too full an understanding of it that there's something in that that seems inequitable.  I mean, it isn't quite just to have this feeling.  Doesn't seem quite fair in some way.
 Think I get that feeling though, in part at least, that if...if responsibility means that you are accountable for what has been a part of your past, and so on, then in some real sense you're to blame and that seems unfair.  Seems to me that part of what you're saying now is that if you can see this as responsibility for what happens now...that then...then it might look differently.  Is that something of the distinction you're making?
 Feel that it's [a] notion that I am myself and I am responsible for what I do with my self.  That's just a necessary sort of thing because nobody else can take that away from you.  But that...somehow I gather you feel you've just been seeing it in some other way than that.
 I think I do get it better, but I'm still not sure that I get all of it.  Let me try it. That when this idea of being responsible for yourself hit you, it seemed as though the meaning of that was that it was a denial that your past of your parents or your culture or your class of anything had had any part of responsibility for making you what you are.  And if it was such a complete acceptance of responsibility, then you'd have to be absolutely independent of all those...are able to cope with all of those elements.  And that seemed like such an impossible task that it seemed as though there must then be compromise somewhere.  And also the... also perhaps there was blame, and also the assuming of such an enormous responsibility as that seemed to be made you feel like snapping at the, at the world.  That anything like it?
 Even though it isn't very clear, it might be a burden that one could bear.
 Your attitude couldn't help but be, the lucky so and so.
 May I go back a moment to what you said just before that. I gather that your feeling at first was, your head was sort of bloody but unbowed; alright, if it was necessary to assume all this blame for what you are to this point, and responsibility for what you are and will be...alright, by God, you'd do it if you had to.  But it seemed a terrific burden.
 Seems as though this would upset even those deepest things that you absolutely knew.
 Sort of as though, if I accept this, I've got to question even the things which my experience tells me are most deeply true, and stand up best. 
 Have to be worked through and it isn't too clear, but it sounds as though at least there was some distinction now between blame and responsibility.
 It's fascinating to stand off and try and look at 'em, understand the process, quite apart from what's happening to you.  But I'm not quite clear what you mean by...you feel that might somehow be a function of the diagnostic...?
 Sensing.
 I think I do get that.  In other words, the loosening up kind of experience that you had before, the readiness for something to pop, seemed to happen when I responded to that...when my words contained, contained that phrase, something about your feet on the ground. And then when the thing did pop, it was after the interview.  Seems not quite right; too overwhelming. Too something. And that today as you've worked through it, it no longer seems quite so overwhelming, and you aren't too sure that you see...well, you perhaps see the thing clearly, but you haven't yet quite experienced it clearly in its newer form, but at least it seems as though it is, it's not this overwhelming thing, it is something lighter, something that can be borne, something that you can live with.
 I can even see things wrongly and correct it.
 I can feel something as though really I had been socked and yet can feel too, dimly, almost even at that time, that, no, there must be a more usable, livable kind of significance there.
 M-hm.
 Well, I guess it's...
 Hard work. Wednesday at 2:30?
 Well, I'm afraid it'll never get cleared up. We might just as well leave it as is. Actually I'm feeling good that the pile is so much lower than it was yesterday. Some of that  
 No, that's...
 That is, realizing that this is really annoyance with yourself, and being quite aware of that, somehow makes a little difference...the expression of it toward other people, and less damaging in its expression.  M-hm.
 You don't like yourself very well at such a point.  And it comes out against the others presumably.
 Sort of a recognition that something that hit you as quite an overwhelming insight at the moment, may not check out with the way you feel about it later; I mean that that may be modified or qualified quite a good deal.
 It's all a little bit puzzling to you but at least after it was over, I mean, after this last interview was over, I gather that you felt, maybe some of the things you said might have sounded as though you were criticizing me. And now you'd like to make it plain, no, that isn't it...you were searching for what did lie behind it. And certainly one of the feelings that occured to you was, that maybe I had seen this thing first, and maybe that's why it hit you later.Yet as you examine that, that kind of looks as though, maybe in your feelings at least, you were sort of making me responsible for the direction that it took in your own thinking. Is that...?
 I think I get that. Is this what you're saying? That in regard to the issue about your husband coming in, you wanted sufficiently to express your own feelings on it, to run a real risk that that might muddle up, introduce disharmony into, or what ever you want or way you said it, into the climate or into the relationship here. Is...?
 In some slightly different and unique fashion, you may have feelings that I'm responsible perhaps for the way your thinking took, or have other feelings and so forth. And yet that's quite different somehow from really feeling that about me personally.
 M-hm. If you could clarify the essence of that or understand a little more deeply what was involved in that rather dramatic experience, then the feeling, you might be ready to take a step.
 Is this last question that you ask yourself sort of this: Why not talk about what you're feeling instead of about what you felt.
 That feeling nearly comes to mind now that perhaps you somehow attach a good deal of guilt or blame to yourself.
 It would seem as though the fact that you've resisted any attempt to blame you would indicate that you haven't felt blame or guilt.
 M-hm. On the rational and intellectual side, you would hesitate to put blame on others, and you've been quite sensitive to the fact that they haven't...that they've been unjustly or unfairly applied to you. And yet, maybe your feelings didn't know that.
 So, if you do feel some guilt that before you haven't recognized, then where does that lead?  Or what does that mean?  Or how does it fit in?
 Toward others, you mean?
 The feelings come along in a pretty rapid sequence: I mean, first realization, maybe I do feel guilty; then the feeling, alright, maybe I feel guilty.  If so, that is a misperception of the fact; I mean, there's no real reason for me to feel guilty.  And then, kind of a questioning of yourself: Or is that a cover-up of some kind.
 M-hm. I think I do get the difference there. I mean, that outwardly some people might seem optimistic and you might seem even pessimistic. And  would recognize that people have the right to be different. But that inwardly, you have a sort of sense of positive affirmation in yourself, as though there is a smile or a song or something that's in there at a pretty basic level.  Is that ...?
 M-hm.  That is, you'd like to get on with this, you'd like to feel that it isn't going to last forever and so on.
 And if...blaming yourself or criticising  yourself would speed it up, well, you'd like to think about that, but...as you really think it over, you feel, that just isn't you.  That isn't your way of working with yourself.
 M-hm.
 Is this what you're saying, that if your essential self is really the positive kind of self, and you feel pretty keenly that it is...and then it's in there too, is the feeling that you're guilty, you're to blame and so forth.  And my gosh, you've got two just totally incompatible  there.
 Not quite sure I get that, if you can know it, as you come on some of these other things, not just by giving a label, but by somehow experiencing the thing here, then you can leave it behind.  There is just...it no longer is a disturbing part of you.  Is that...?
 Some kind of feeling that you may come to, will give clarity to what is now names and labels and this business of confusion.
 Monday I'm going to be in... .
 So would I.
 I think the only thing that...that's one reason too that I thought of you. Because it seems to me that, more than some people, I feel, I should think it might be quite possible for both of us just to feel, well, okay, this is a strange  other things are going on, but...here we are, and kind of talk as usual.  And sort of...well, I think that the more that was true, that we just didn't give a damn, that...
 That's right.
 Alright.  be very grateful.
 I don't know.   but it would...I quite agree with you, the more either of us has any sense of trying  the more that would completely...
 I mean, if it's just an interview, that would  okay.
 Well...
 Yeah.  I see.
 I also think it would be entirely possible  the first few minutes might be a little bit phoney for one or the other of us, but I can't believe that that would last.
 Well, I really appreciate that.
 I'd just like to say this, too.  That he will  transportation .  It will of course take longer  And I really feel that...well in some way rewarding you on it, except I would quite think that it would pay for a number of sessions.
 I wouldn't either.  I mean, if you're willing to do it, then  .
 It's turned a little sunshiny, but the wind is really cold.
 Sounds as though it isn't as though this was a new idea, but it was a new experience of really feeling that I did care and if I get the rest of that, sort of a willingness on your part to let me care.
 An awareness that brought some kind of an inner release from tension of some sort.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  I see.
 As I get that, the...you began to realize that I care about the outcome of this, and that had meaning to you in terms of your own experience in relation to your feeling toward people in general, that yes, that hit it that you do care, care very much what happens to people, even though you quite refuse to use the term that you love humanity, and so on.  But you do care. Care so much that you would do a lot to avoid damaging them.  That perhaps in...I'm not quite sure of the last of what you're expressing, but perhaps in not quite being aware of how much you care, you've somehow hurt yourself somewhat?
 No?
 That's it, sort of.
 You care enough to want to understand and to want to avoid contributing to anything that would make for more neuroticism, or more of that aspect in human life.
 And this is a continuing feeling and process, not a something once and for all kind of thing.
 You're not giving yourself to humanity in the sense that now the deal is completed.
 Something much more lasting and...and I gathered from the way you put it, much more significant than that.
 M-hm. Whereas now you feel that caring is a very important part of this, and perhaps a part that helps to explain in a counselor the kind of learning that therapy is.
 Sounds as though what you have felt has been a sort of self contained aloneness, not rejecting others, just that that's the way life is, or has been. That...well, it is kind of self contained. And that this thing that sets this recent experience apart is that for the first time it has really been experienced that maybe that isn't the whole story, that someone else can care and that can enter into your own experience.
 As long as you didn't need their interest or their possible caring, then you did call.
 It was just that kind of aloofness somehow that couldn't let them care.
 M-hm.  Yeah, I see.  That...yeah, it isn't...
 M-hm. That isn't a shutting them out, as it were.  It's...
 M-hm.  M-hm.
 M-hm. It's something that just didn't seem possible or natural or real for you. It had nothing to do with them as people.
 M-hm. That you wouldn't want to change the notion after all, it is your life and it is in a certain sense a separation from everyone else, and yet there ought to be this plus, which as I get it is perhaps described in part as a willingness to accept feeling from others, a willingness to share somehow in this...nevertheless quite independent venture that life is.
 Afraid that you would be devastated if you really accepted somehow this caring by another, or a sharing, and  devastated perhaps in the sense that it might reveal your own weakness which is this kindliness, is that...?
 I see.
 You couldn't have sought it out. And partly because to take that kind of interest from another might have threatened your own feeling of strength. But that you would be fearful that it would show up the fact that you weren't really as strong and independent as you seemed? Is that anywhere near it?
 It's an experience it‚Äôs awfully hard to put down accurately into words, and yet I get a sense of difference here in this relationship, that from the feeling that, this is mine, I've got to do it, I am doing it, and so on, to a somewhat different feeling that...I could let you in.
 M-hm. Yes, that paradox sort of sums it up, doesn't it?
 In all of this, there is a feeling, it's still...every aspect of my experience is mine and that's of inevitable and necessary and so on. And yet that isn't the whole picture either. Somehow it can be shared or another's interest can come in and in some ways it is new.
 Except there's a very real sense of rightness about this feeling that you have, hm?
 And the thought crosses my mind that maybe this would get something of the over-all feeling: that the cat has become a person.
 You don't want to really leave them.
 Just doesn't...
 ...quite click. 
 That would really seem awful if you just sort of had a welcome mat out and...
 Mean, do, is there ever a finish or is it always a process?
 In other words, the kind of learning that has gone on here has been something of quite worthwhile to you in and of itself, but the question you're asking is: will I ever have a clear intellectual picture of what has gone on at this somehow deeper kind of learning level?
 At the deeper level.
 Yeah. .
 Really significant things just come; they're not struggled for.
 Monday and Wednesday?
 Well, I think a number of people experience that but I can see how that doesn't particularly change the experiences that exist for you. I mean, here is this painfulness that somehow facing up to certain aspects of experience, and it seems worse, and yet you also realize that it may be an indication of movement or...
 That at first the fear was, well, all right, I can sort of...let myself be a little loose at the seams here in this experience, but if it's happening outside...
 ...holy smokes. And then that feeling changed to the notion that maybe really it was part of a process of loosening up outside of this experience, and letting yourself experience things outside that normally you wouldn't have.
 Just seem to happen.
 Wouldn't want that kind of unexpected pain to be a continuing sort of thing.
 You feel very betwixt and between then.  It somehow seems almost impossible to go back. Yet if that were really a free choice between going backward and forward, there'd be lots to be said for going back. 
 Some things that are very much in your feelings that can't...
 ...quite be expressed.
 At this point there's always very strongly the feeling, you don't add a damn thing.
 Sounds like a feeling of annoyance and pulling away.
 A little bit of resentment.
 Kinda spoils it as a weapon.
 So that this feeling you'd like to understand better or...feel it more adequately, doesn't seem like it's guilt, but somehow that... even that line of thought gets you off on the wrong train, in that you don't want an intellectual formulation of it. That isn't the track.
 It's the experiencing of it.
 M-hm. It isn't guilt except in the sense of being very much wounded somehow.
 That catches a little more the flavor of the feeling that it's almost as if you're really weeping for yourself.
 Sort of think that there is a cultural objection to feeling sorry about yourself. And yet you feel the feeling you're experiencing isn't quite what the culture objected to either.
 Feel that here is the basis of it as you experience it, is a feeling of real tears for yourself. But that you can't show, mustn't show, so that's been covered by bitterness that you don't like, that you'd like to be rid of. You almost feel you'd rather absorb the hurt than to...than to feel the bitterness.  And what you seem to be saying quite strongly is, I do hurt, and I've tried to cover it up.
 M-hm. Like a new discovery really.
 As though some of the most delicate aspects of you physically almost have been crushed or hurt.
 Just can't help but feel very deeply sorry for the person that is you.
 Sorry to see that hurt.
 M-hm. M-hm.
 Feel as though that bitterness is something you'd like to be rid of because it...doesn't do right by you.  .
 You could track down some tag or other and could make quite a pursuit of that, but you feel as though the core of the whole things is the, the kind of experience that you're just having right here.
 Seems as though you couldn't possibly expose yourself if part of yourself is so hurt, so you wonder if somehow the hurt mustn't be healed at first. 
 Would this get it? That, though you don't like the hurt, yet you feel you can accept that. That's bearable. Somehow, it's the things that have covered up that hurt, like the bitterness, that you just...at this moment, can't stand.
 And a hurt you can accept.  It's a part of life within a lot of other parts too.  You've had lots of fun. But to have all of your life diffused by frustration and bitterness, that you don't like, you don't want, and are now more aware of.
 Just sort of want me to know that in lots of ways you carry on just as you always have.
 You have a two-thirty appointment on Wednesday, and then it looks as though this photographic thing might be on Friday afternoon. Would that be a possibility for you?
 Would you like to keep the Wednesday and then have the Friday time too if that develops?
 Or would you rather...I'm pretty sure it will be on Friday afternoon. I've been trying to get hold of the man to find out for sure, but haven't been able to do so yet. Or if you want just two this week, then we can set Friday the...
 Alright. Tell you, I'll know by tomorrow, and if I find that it's not going to be on Friday, then I'll call you...
 ...and reinstate the Wednesday one.
 And if it is to be on Friday, I'll leave it I don't call you.
 Okay?
 No.
 ...there?
  Well, I don't know why we had to have both a hot day and a hot room. 
 M-hm. Does that...that statement of mine had a lot of meaning and part of that meaning at least is somehow being really at home in all life. Is that...?
 Not sure I get all of that. First the feeling was good. But then a little bit of the...a feeling of rejecting that? I'm not quite sure that I...
 The feeling you really ought to be able to, but yet real disturbance at the thought of doing so?
 Feeling of kind of belongingness in life and so on was something that temporarily dropped out?
 M-hm. M-hm. There was something about that experience that kind of sharpened the conflict. It made it seem as though you were going to have to admit something, and somehow in there is the balance of this feeling of bitterness that you spoke of last time, and over against that, the feeling of real hurt to you.
 M-hm. M-hm. That this wasn't a major thing. Or a major feeling. 
 From that angle, it's something that you don't seek for; it seeks you out 
 Perhaps this is kind of an advance guard of...or spearhead for more significant movement that will follow?
 It was.  M-hm.
 M-hm. So when I made that remark about your feet on the ground, it almost seemed as though, by that remark, I was challenging the fact...or raising the question as to whether your feet had been on the ground, whether you were solidly based. But I gather that ... sort of that there was a feeling, what the heck, I have been solidly based. But I caught also in this thing you're just saying, some feeling of the notion that you've been relearning that or re-experiencing in that notion of your feet on the ground. Is that...?
 M-hm. It wasn't...
 Yeah. It wasn't the words at all. It's just that they happened to set off an experience for you which has made very vivid the meaning in the experience of having, of belonging to life, and of feeling solidly based. Is that...?
 M-hm. M-hm.
 In spite of? I'm not...
 Even though challenged.  Is that...?
 Here's where we get vague, hm?
 M-hm. Is this something like it: that you could never have been so fully aware of the hurt if along with that hadn't come the feeling, and life has played me a damn dirty trick to hurt me so much.
 M-hm. M-hm.
 M-hm. It isn't any sense of pleasure or anything of that sort, but somehow you feel there's something good in the fact that you can resent the hurt that you've experienced. Is that...?
 M-hm. M-hm. Why doesn't seem so important. It's just that it's...it somehow feels sound.
 M-hm. M-hm. This kind of resentment I have, and I don't feel sorry about it.
 M-hm. Let's see if I get that. In other words, in fighting people...yes, that they did do you hurt...hurt a lot, but not nearly as much as this deeper kind of hurt. And yet somehow you had to have people hurting you partly because you had to do something about this deeper kind of hurt. Is that...?
 And that seems like something quite basic, if you can really experience it fully and utilize it.
 M-hm. M-hm. 
 Let's see. I'm not quite sure I do get that. That you...you're beginning to appreciate the fact that though you've lived in a society that deals in rewards and punishments, that you don't really go along with that.
 You feel that's the neurotic aspect of...
 
 It's a very deep feeling, isn't it, that you've recently been more aware, both in the culture and in your own family, of what rewards and punishments do to people, and for yourself you want no part of that.
 And that's where the anger becomes just consuming as you feel so strongly that people must not be treated in that fashion, and yet you felt in your own situation with your daughter, that there was nothing you could do about it.  Is that...?
 It is that...think I do understand it more. And it was that laboratory demonstration that just made you realize how...how really horrible that kind of an approach to life and to a person really is.
 I get very deeply the feeling that you felt you were betraying yourself by that kind of treatment of her.
 So that you felt that you really went over and joined the world in saying, I guess I must guide you and constrict you and confine you.  And that...
 That you feel is just a horrible thing.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  That is, the realization of the part that you had played while you were not being true to your own self.  Is that...?
 But a some point you sort of gave up...on that point of view.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  That is, you've been exposed to enough of that, that I suppose it was easier to see it that way, is that...?  .
 M-hm.  I see.  M-hm.  M-hm.  That you did have too blankety blank much of that point of view that you'd been exposed to anyway.
 M-hm.  Intellectually it might seem as though maybe you should find something very awful within yourself.  And then perhaps this would be a justifying type of behavior.  But as you really feel it, that isn't the way it is.
 I merely meant that...thought that this was what you were expressing: that sometimes it occurs to you that perhaps there is something, that perhaps you should be finding something awful in yourself.  In which case the kind of conversation that you've just been expressing might seem like justification...
 ...but when you look at that whole picture, that isn't the way it feels to you. It doesn't seem as though that's justifying yourself. Is that closer to it?
 M-hm.  Maybe I'm being too easy on myself but...no, it doesn't really seem like that.  It's...as it feels, you don't feel that there is that awful something or other.
 It's in the books, hm?
 As I get it there, what you're saying is that as you experience yourself, it doesn't seem as though there's something awfully awful about it.
 In other words, that sounds more like a sense of difference that you feel, but that's something that you prize, not something that you would deplore.
 Guess we're going to have to call it quits.  Next week at the usual time?
 Hello. Oh, there's one thing. I feel I owe you an apology. I knew that Mr. X  is going to expect a little work from you and forgot to mention that. But I didn't know until it was all over how much he was going to ask. 
 If I'd had any notion that he...
 I say I felt a little apologetic for not having at least warned you adequately.  I'm sorry, and you do whatever you are willing to do.
 We're settling up odds and ends.  What do I owe you for the taxi?
 Well, alright.  Although one thing I was going to say is that with all of this, as I told you once before, I think this should account for quite a few interviews. I don't know what would seem fair to you, but I should think ten or fifteen interviews, something like that would be well within reason to repay you for your permission to photograph the interview.
 Sure.
 It's one of the things in the books, but I haven't found it.
 That was my feeling too. Just very little peripheral spots in which I felt conscious of the situation, but for the most part, no.
 Actually the whole trouble with that was that I suddenly became aware that it would be preferable if we really didn't run over forty-five minutes, and here it was a little over forty-five minutes. 
 Oh, just one other little angle on that. If you think over the number you'd like, a fair number of interviews...and as I say, ten or fifteen seems reasonable to me...then I'll make it definite at the desk, so they won't be thinking that you're not paying or something
 Sort of no way of estimating.
 Alright.  Well, I'll...
 Okay. I'll think it over and leave word at the desk and tell you.
 M-hm. This may... part of a feeling of stewing and frustration is that it has the form of being a permissive situation in which you will be able to communicate what it is that you feel about yourself and so on. And yet that actually that is deceptive because you can only communicate compromise meanings really, rather than the real meaning that the thing has for you.
 Let me see if I get that last. That the fact that it seems, quote, ‚Äúpermissive,‚Äù but actually isn't really, and because you feel it is related to the sessions, now, is this correct? That therefore it... throws a little question or something over the sessions too? Or...
 No. Alright. Okay. M-hm. More that they don't quite match really, is that it? ...In their...quality?
 M-hm. Yeah, that fits in. That gives more meaning to my...more meaning to me about my statement that they don't match. In other words, the two atmospheres kind of jar, really. They don't quite...
 M-hm. Or perhaps what you had sort of hoped or felt would be true was that they would somehow have the same quality.
 You mean your lack of liking for it, or your hope that it will be kind of a temporary phase is because you wouldn't want it to have any adverse effect on others, is that...?
 Within yourself, you felt alright about it.  But you wouldn't want to behave in ways such as being quiet that would be disturbing to the people whom you like and whom you associate with.
 I believe that I get the feeling from that that this is tied in with the rhythm feeling that you have about this whole experience and this is kind of a resting period.  Is that the notion?
 A real feeling that...
 ... I'm relaxing and have no need at the moment to babble or do a lot of other things.
 Don't feel that's a part of the way you want to be.
 I'm not quite clear whether you feel there just isn't much you can do about that, or whether it's your feeling that, I don't really want to do much about that.
 That's me, and I'm not sure I want to change it.
 I think I almost get the feeling there that what you're saying is, I wouldn't want to be a person who wouldn't have been hurt by these things, but that sensitivity and the intensity of my feelings is something that has its positive side as well as the fact that I can suffer from it.  Is that...?
 It's been so good to get out both the hurt and the bitterness where you can look at them.  But the bitterness doesn't have advantages for you and ...
 ...you would like to be free from that...so that you could rest.
 All of those feelings sound so meaningful, I hardly know which ones to indicate I've understood.  But it seems to me that you are at a perspective point where you can see more clearly where you've come.  And even to the point where this could almost be an ending point.  Except that this freedom from the bitterness that you now experience seems almost too good to be true.  I mean, you surely couldn't be rid of it that easily.  And you're a little sceptical of that.  And then I gather too that this relationship just seems good to you and you feel a certain amount of dependence on it.  And that's part of you too at the moment.
 I may be off on that, but...as I get it, there was at one point the feeling that you were reaching an agreement, that you were in agreement somehow with me, is that...?
 What you're getting from me isn't agreement in the sense in which you first understood it as something that you could reject or manipulate and so on.  It is somehow something different and something that permits you to go on that is different from just agreement.
 In other words that there is something...this feeling that you have now, that what you receive from me is something more constant than something that can be pushed back or pushed around is perhaps very close to the heart of therapy, because it's at this point that you feel pretty sure therapy is beginning to work.
 You can say you haven't done anything about anything, and yet...that has come to be a matter of quite secondary importance as you grow increasingly sure that you can do the things about anything when the time is ripe and when you're ready to within yourself.  Is that...?
 Not tired, but if I get the meaning of that sigh, it is that I can relax.
 And that seems to have a good deal of meaning that you can rest.
 Almost a little fear that if you permit yourself to rest, you may slump and not...undertake the things still to be done.
 You can't quite trust yourself to rest without its probably having some unfortunate connotation of something?
 Don't want resting to cause you to miss out on some real opportunities.
 You've been inclined almost to look askance at yourself for this feeling, and yet as you think about it more, maybe it comes close to the two sides of the picture, that if a child wants to cry, why shouldn't he cry? And if he wants to feel pleased with himself, doesn't he have a perfect right to feel pleased with himself? And that sort of ties in with this, what I would see as an appreciation of yourself that you've experienced every now and again.
 I'm really a pretty rich and interesting person.
 Could be that they have a wisdom about that that we've lost.
 Let's see.  We have a date Wednesday, don't we.
 Some reflex or something?
 Seems you may have helped him a little anyway.  
 Oh, by the way, I'm going to tell them at the desk to count a dozen interviews paid.  How would that be?  .
 M-hm.  Does this catch it?  That you realize that you were sort of rejecting or pushing away any warm interest or acceptance; whether it came from me, or whether it came from others, that there was a tendency to do that.  And perhaps partly because somehow you felt vulnerable to that, or a little bit afraid of it...
 ...so that now somehow, first of all, you can take that kind of feeling more and realize that in the future, yes, you might turn it back sometimes or you might accept it, but that it's more in your hands.
 I wonder if this analogy would...carry any meaning to you, or would it seem like the same kind of feeling?  If you look through these...kaleidoscopes, these little toys with little bits of glass, and you turn it just a little, and all of a sudden there's a whole shifted pattern.
 Is that something like...?
 That quite gently, all of a sudden there's the sharp realization that the pattern has shifted so...
 ...that you are somehow different at this point.
 M-hm.  I get that now.
 M-hm.  To call it you isn't hardly correct, it's almost more total.  It's more physical as though something has shifted and changed and altered, and you are somehow more complete because of it.
 M-hm.  You can feel, as I get it, it's so deep and basic that this isn't a question of some little sort of flurry.  This feels as though the very foundation stones are moving, is that what...?
 Something that would change your physiology if we had the tools to measure.
 That last makes it sound as though the...the outer world and the world of thought is shifted by this too, as well as the...
 ...bodily physiological world.
 That would be a very surface way of looking...
 ...at what is a much deeper experience.
 I'd like to see if I can capture a little of what that means to you.  It is as you've gotten very deeply acquainted with yourself on kind of a brick-by-brick experiencing basis, and in that sense have become more self-ish, and the notions of really, ...a in the discovering of what is the core of you as separate from all the other aspects, you come across the realization, which is a very deep and pretty thrilling realization, that the core of that self is not only without hate, but is really something more resembling a saint, something really very pure, is the word I would use.  And that that... You can try to depreciate that.  You can say, maybe it's a sublimation, maybe it's an abnormal manifestation, screwball and so on.  But inside of yourself, you know that it isn't.  This contains the feelings which could contain rich sexual expression, but it sounds bigger than, and really deeper than that.  And yet fully able to include all that could be a part of sex expression.
 You almost feel that if you could get away from this almost mystical groping formulation of it; if you could get it more matter of factly, maybe then it would, you could use it more.
 But in a very real sense you've been talking about you, and yet in a totally fresh and different sense, this is talking about you.
 This is a going down and immersing yourself in your self almost.
 I'd like to pick up one of those things too, to see if I understand it.  That it sounds as though this sort of idea you're expressing is something you must be going up to capture, something that isn't quite.  Actually though, the feeling is, this is a going down to capture something that's more deeply there.
 That this isn't going up into the thin ideal.  This is a going down into the astonishingly solid reality that...
 ...is really more surprising than...
 M-hm.  It is something more selfish than what you have said, and that isn't bad; I mean, that there is...
 In other words, this isn't something newly manufactured somehow in your experience; this is something that you've had tastes of before.
 For a long time.
 It's almost a recapturing of the core of your self, or of your whole self, which is something you've had glimpses of, and also have not had over long periods of time too.
 And it isn't quite so...it isn't quite so temporary as that sounds either...
 ...that you've just caught it for an instant.
 Is this it?  That it isn't a comparative sort of experience that this is something better than somebody else, or worse than somebody else.  It just isn't in that class.
 Counseling and Psychotherapy.
 Here were both of these things, both of these ideas that were stimulating, each one imperfect in its own way, and neither one having anything of the quality or the punch of what you have experienced within yourself, and yet both somehow related to that, is that...
 You can feel yourself grow, and though it has a certain amount of pain connected with it; it's a tremendous adventure.
 Yes, we're about through.
 You really didn't think you were, hm?
 You mean, you didn't think you did?
 Shall we save you next Monday and Wednesday.
 Let me just see if the following...yeah, the following Monday I'm going to be away, but I think we can work it in.
 And then I was just wondering the other day.  I can't seem to remember whether I've ever...I think I mentioned it to you, but I just want to make sure.  I'm going to be gone all summer, have I ever mentioned that?
 Okay.  And we can talk it over specifically as the time approaches...
 ...because if you wanted, you can shift to someone else and keep coming in regularly.
 Certainly we can arrange this kind of thing that you speak of, with having someone that you would know you could come to...
 ...just in case.  But we can work it out any way that you like.
 Directly you should be all ready to go.
 Your feeling at the present time is that you have been very much aware of all the cultural pressures...not always very much aware, but there have been so many of those in my life...and now I'm going down more deeply into myself to find out what I really feel, and it seems very much at the present time as though that somehow separates you a long ways from your culture, and that's a little frightening, but feels basically good.  Is that...?
 Does this catch it?  That...as you've gone more and more deeply into yourself, and as you think about the kind of things that you've discovered and learned and so on, the conviction grows very, very strong that no matter how far you go, the things that you're going to find are not dire and awful.  They have a very different character.
 But that you have carried for a long time the sense that...must be something sort of bad there.  I mean if you didn't see it or feel guilty about it, it was at least bad that you didn't see it or feel guilty about it.
 That your feelings add up to the fact that...quite deeply and in no deceptive sense, just feel as though...it isn't guilt that you need to feel, and that there is something more positive at the core.  Is that...?
 Don't feel how, don't feel sure how permanent this attitude is, but as of now, I'm just sort of matter of factly okay.
 Confidence extends toward the future...
 ...but you have it quite clearly understood that that doesn't mean you wouldn't be...
 ...open to...
 ...contradictory facts...
 ...if you discover them.
 Elsewhere you might be able to do it.  But here to talk about another person...I get the feeling -- this may be way off -- I get the feeling that you don't want to expose them in any way that isn't...somehow might not be genuine or right.  You want to deal with them tenderly, somehow.
 M-hm.    Almost as though this would expose them too completely. Too realistically.
 M-hm.  And the hurt of that exposure, the hurt to you -- I mean, it's your fingertips that feel the pain in somehow exposing them.  Is that...?
 You don't want to gloss over anything here in any way.
 And to be very real and very genuine about what you feel...just seems like almost too much.  .
 Even though, just to hear yourself bringing out the realities about certain other people and about yourself in relation to them seems like something you wish there was a way around.
 Seems as though the way lies through that, not around it.
 I almost get a feeling of compassion.  I don't know whether that's...
 M-hm.  But you see it almost in different depths.  I mean, on the surface is this feeling of, I have a right to be at times hard and punishing, because I am thoroughly good, and yet no one responds to me as they should.  And yet you can sense underneath that that desperate feeling of need for affection and yet the conviction that I am not a lovable person.
 It's an awfully raw, naked fact to confront, that another person could be so desperately...
 Just feel that in the face of that much clearer awareness of his conviction about his unlovableness that there's just nothing that you can do.
 As though that's not something that you have control over.  Is that...?
 Think I get that.  That even though...it just hurts so you can hardly put it into words, to describe his need, even though you feel for him as deeply as that, you feel that you haven't contributed to his need, you don't feel you can contribute to his need, you're very doubtful that anyone could have met that awful need.
 Talking about a person.  And if I get the feeling, it is that at a very deep level, you're saying, you poor, poor man; and yet, and in saying that with a realization of how much you must have not met his need in all kinds of ways.  And yet, not saying either how...you could.
 That quite below all the surface things that there might have been differences on, and so on, you realize that there has been some of this...compassionate understanding for a long time, but that you've never been too much aware of it really.  And certainly what has come out has been not that but bitterness and anger and a lot of other things.  .
 You've been the person on whom this need was focused.  Is that...?
 No?
 Okay.
 M-hm.  I see.  And it's that that you've been the target of.
 I see.  The feeling that to be exposed year after year to some one who feels very deeply that nobody could possible love me is being exposed to a terrific amount of negative charge.
 You fear that a person who's felt that way, couldn't do other than hate the world that doesn't love him.
 Seems awfully good to feel the bitterness in you kind of recede.
 But you feel quite sure that...nothing you can do can really touch...the deep conviction in him.
 You'd do a little patching, but it wouldn't amount to much.
 They're just necessary elements in your thinking...
 ...and feeling your own way through.
 To say something that might seem...negative about another person is really much harder on you than to just rip yourself to pieces .
 There's no rancor, no negative feeling it's an attempt...to see the relationship between you and to see in as it is, is that...?
 Guess that's...I feel myself that doesn't quite catch it either; guess that that doesn't...  really catch the  the tenderness or sort of delicacy with which...you feel that you would like to be accurate about him.  Is that...?
 But you feel that it is best described in sort of...negative terms as without hate, than in any more positive...
 Wednesday at 2:30?
 The book couldn't seem any more inadequate to you as a description of an experience than it does to me; so you don't need to bother about that. 
 By that time there'll be another volume.
 Feeling as though...the end of this particular experience may not be too far off which is a matter of some regret...and yet a feeling that  anything as meaningful as this one can close and go on and yet could be turned to if there should be need.
 The earlier feelings of physical dependency  and perhaps some concern about...what you say or what gets down on the recording, those have kind of...faced out to the feeling that...  well, in relation to some of these external things, like the research, that if there's anything you can do, okay.
 That sounds very meaningful...I think I get particularly this notion that...at the present time...there is more of the...of a listening to the music that seems to be going on in this relationship rather than music that you specifically sing.  I mean, it's something that happens more than...
 ...and a...that in that, a, without being specifically aware at all of what the next chord may be, you find that you are nevertheless prepared to hear that next melody or note or what not, even though you didn't know specifically what it would be.
 But that somehow it is...concerned with more than just you specifically.  It's something larger than that, more over-all than that.  Is that...?
 Somehow didn't want one type of music to interfere with the other...
 ...that was already going on.
 Just bits of the totally unexpected aspects of the whole experience.
 It's just a little bit of a frosting that...
 ...needn't have been there but is there and is very much appreciated.
 Let's see if I can make sure I get that.  In other words, that it wasn't the basic distress that you were the target for, but the results of that which was hitting you.
 This perhaps puts it a little more directly, but I wonder if this would be it: That you feel as though the self that you were became almost confined to being...you as he defined you or as he saw you.  Is that...?
 Yes.  Not quite.
 Almost the only evidence that you still were a person separate from the way he saw you were these...outbursts which came alone occasionally.
 That behind some of the fighting and bickering and so on, part of it was this...very basic conviction that I am not just what you see.
 I am something different from that.
 And the vividness of that feeling and the fact that it was in no sense anything you planned as a part of your defense...makes it seem even more real and convincing to you, hm?
 M-hm.  Is this it?  That even though some of the accusations are quite true...a...that even accepting that or trying to do something about them, would not, you feel, have changed the basic fact of...of what, of the intent to confine you within the boundaries of the way in which he saw you.  Is that...?  
 M-hm.  
 Yes, I get you.  Perhaps...that trying to accept or do something about any of those accusations...would still not change the basic situation that...he saw you in his own terms, and expected you to see yourself in that same way.
 Does that come close?
 Feeling that somehow you were being controlled in some quite subtle way and in some quite deep way, even by the...very outwardly generous attitude on his part of wanting to straighten this thing out and so on.
 So that what you're saying is in no sense an accusation; you don't feel that and then don't feel that he intended hurt to you.  But that the kind of thing you're saying is an attempt to understand his and what some of his reasons were behind some of his reactions and how they affected you, is that...?
 You can see how a person of that kind might have meant more, might have filled some  of the gaps that he needed so badly, but for you, feel you couldn't do that.  There were more facets of your personality to be expressed than just that.  Is that...?
 I don't know whether it would be helpful; but I'd like to see whether I have got the heart of that.  That you feel that in his love and in his sexual relationships and so on, that there has been basically a kind of a hating underneath that he isn't aware of.  But this is what you have responded to.  And that particularly in the sex realm, there's just been the feeling that you couldn't open yourself to that degree of hurt that would come with that amount of closeness.
 You'd rather well off that aspect of your life entirely than to do battle in that sphere.
 And it may say in the books that with no sex outlet, you would have to be neurotic, but you can sort of look at that with a different attitude...just, well, maybe.  But maybe there are some areas that, that you can't quite clear up.
 At least that the alternative answers such as going out to seek a sex life as it were, just aren't you.
 As I get that, the lift comes from the feeling, ‚ÄúI don't have to turn all this situation in on me...‚Äù
 ...and feel that ‚ÄúI'm...there's something awfully wrong with me.‚Äù
 And on the other hand, the feeling that...no, I'm not afraid of sex, and in a sense, I'm not even fearful of frustrations that...
 You feel kind of a confidence in your own feelings...
 ...in that respect.  M-hm.
 Afraid we'll really have to...
 Going to be out of town on Monday.  But...we could make it Wednesday and Friday if you would like.
 So happens that both those days there's a possibility I may be a little late but...
 I think so 
 M-hm.  Bye.
 Got back from downtown, and I can't say I'm enthusiastic about it.
 See if I can get a little of that.  That is in relation to your husband, one thing you're very sure of is that you don't want to push people around.  Still you do have very real yearnings of your own: to be able to be more free for one thing, in doing what you choose to do.  And other aspects of that yearning too.  But then particularly this last one that you...you would like so much to be more free in the outgoingness of your affection without feeling you had to subtract it from somewhere else in order to have any to express.  Is...?
 That love and affection just aren't that kind of thing, that they can be subtracted from one place to put another.  Is that...?
 M-hm.  Feel that within you are these positive feelings really yearning for expression, and yet because of obligations which you feel and which you feel to be imposed on you, they really can't be expressed.
 That takes away the intent.
 There is an imposed obligation that you feel you can't meet and yet you're not free from.  Is that...?
 So that on the surface part of the time you'll be bitchy, part of the time you'll be examining facts and so on that really aren't important facts.  But underneath there as I get it, two things: there is the desire to find channels of expression for your positive feelings, and there is the strong sense that you have arrived at no final answer.  This is an evolving thing, a process, not some thing definite.
 Not even sure it would work, but I gather you would...
 M-hm.  M-hm.  You would like...if I understand that, you'd like for him to really understand and accept what it is that he's talking about rather than to simply put it on in terms of a mask.  Is that...?
 You feel it might be more gracious of you, and wish you could do it, if actually you could remove yourself from the picture for a while, is that...?
 As I catch that feeling, it is that you can be relatively comfortable with saying at the moment, I don't know.  Which means that for you your friends' concern, overconcern about the situation is something sort of amusing, rather than to be taken at face value.
 Above all things, that's what you don't want.
 It doesn't mean just complete lack of any notions on which to base a solution. It means more that you're aware of many, many elements, but the way in which they crystalize...that as yet perhaps isn't clear to you.
 You can understand how, for him, your interviews would seem to be a complete flop.
 So that since you're pretty well aware of your feelings in that relationship, and of the...also aware of the fact that those change from time to time, but that you can continue to be aware of them, then that means that what you can accomplish here in regard to it is pretty much over a bit what...other things belong...not in this hour.
 If I understand you rightly, you're saying that you'd worked on it a great many times when ostensibly you weren't working on it at all.
 You went as far as you were ready to go or felt it helpful to go, and stopped at that point in that area.
 One popping hour and one talking hour.
 Somehow even though inside you still feel qualms at times, and all that sort of thing, yet you feel a greater confidence in your ability to cope with some of the problems that face you.  Is that...?
 In those areas you've both been aware of what you're doing and quite considerably aware of why you're doing those things.  That hasn't been one of the areas that has needed your working on.  Is that...?
 Just wasn't one of those crucial issues that...
 Is this it?  That initially there was so strongly the feeling that there must be something very wrong with you that you weren't aware of.  And even now there still occurs to you the possibility that maybe you're just kinda stupid or something in not having found that terrible answer within yourself.  Yet that, stronger than that, as I understand what you're saying, is the feeling that perhaps actually you've been underrating yourself, that in a sense you've been almost meek; which just isn't you.  That...you are a person that...much more than that implies.  Does that come anywhere near?  
 You don't know, and you're content not to be sure on that particular point.
 Relax, hm?
 M-hm.  So that as you look back over the whole relationship with Peggy, you certainly feel some pure regret that perhaps you might have been better and so on.  But by and large, it's only in surface ways that you feel it had any of that, oh, pseudo quality in it, and that that came from the fact that she was one of the few outlets for the affectional feelings that you had a need to pour out.  But underneath that, the relationship was real.  It was spontaneous, it was good.
 It wasn't , but it was good.
 M-hm.  Guess maybe this goes beyond what you've been saying, that it seems as though it kind of sums it up, but sounds to me as though you're saying, I'm not sure I was a good mother, because I'm not sure what a good mother is, and all standards that are being held up as part of that.  But that somehow I was me quite spontaneously in relationship with Peggy.  And that that preserved a lot of good things, even though my behavior might seem to break a lot of rules.
 So that, sure you helped her.  Helping a child is supposed to be bad perhaps.  But you knew at a deeper level that you were doing something which was good for her and which in no way touched her.
 You really come to feel that you can walk out freely and without regret...
 ...is something which is not for you?
 On Friday could we make it at 3 instead of 2:30 ?
 Getting set?  M-hm.  At least in the sense that there's a sharp dividing line between two things.   M-hm.  At this point...
 Oh, yes.
 Well, let's see.  Can't we have twice next week, and...couple times the following week...
 See you a couple of times the following week.
 Okay.  I just thought I'd indicate how much...
 You can have that or more if you want them.
 Is this the sense of that?  That you don't feel there are any judgments in the recordings or anywhere else connected with you that somehow binds you to some specific thing.
 I'm not quite sure that I get the sense of that.
 You mean sort of bringing it from the past, that you can look at it now, is that...?
 I see.  M-hm.
 Somehow it's ahead of you and it's...it is nothing that you're tied to in the background of your experience.
 I think I come a little closer to getting that.  A feeling that some of these things which at the point when they came up, some of them were...conflicted or looked risky or looked absurd or what not.  Now I get it that as you pull them forward as you say, they just seem more natural, they fit into their respective places; is that...?
 Not necessarily right in a narrower specific sense, but quite right in terms of the...
 ...process of which they were a part.
 That what happens really naturally within you without being forced or pressured into happening turns out to have a rightness of its own that is very real.  Is that...?
 As I get what you're saying there, it's...when you say it in a sense might have been anybody, that...some of the things that you've cut through to in your own experience aren't just you, they really seem to be more deeply or broadly true than just you.  Is that...?
 M-hm.  Almost as though it was something that reached out beyond yourself, is that...? That you're speaking for, or might be speaking for others as well as yourself when you say it.  Is that...?
 Just sort of goes to a common denominator that could be experienced by anyone.
 But those are some of the feelings that pop.
 Sounds as though what you are saying there is that you treat a child as another individual...not as a six year old or a fourteen year old or a two year old.
 You relate to a child as just to an individual.
 M-hm.  I see.  And did you want to remove any notion of real intent on your part?  It's just that's what happened spontaneously.
 I get the feeling all through this that you're saying in effect...I can really approve of the spontaneous way that I lived with my child?  That is somehow more deeply based than a form of behaviorism or permissiveness or any of the other ideas that may have been outstripped.  Is that...?
 I am that way and I accept it that that's the way I am.
 I'd like to keep up with what you've been saying.  You see as deeply as you can into the way that this experience must have seemed to her all the way up.  And also realize that how in your feelings, you felt underneath that you did understand that all along; until a point when tensions became so strong, and the thing was so bad, that you began to feel, maybe it is me, maybe I have done the thing wrong.  And trying to operate on that basis was such a terrific strain, even the prospect of a complete crack-up of some kind, either for you or for Peggy, seemed like the only way out almost to getting back to being yourself.
 Not sure that...
 Not completely sure of the meaning of that, but the feeling you know was there, it was a sense of real relief...
 That it hurt terribly, yet somehow trying to be objective and factual about it and your trying to piece it into some sort of order, is that...?
 You've both been a part of each other's strength in the situation, or at least you have been a shock absorber and an outlet for her...makes you feel very certain that each of you will be very pleased when that is no longer necessary.
 And that is a positive kind of feeling.
 Feel as though she would be as pleased to be located in outer Mongolia...
 ...as you would be pleased to have her there.
 I know.
 M-hm.  You're growing away from each other and both of you can take it.  Just pleasure.
 M-hm.  Thank you for permitting me to be the separate person that I am.
 Yes, I'm afraid so.
 How would you like to leave it in regard to next week.
 How would you like to leave it?  Monday and Wednesday of next week.
 Two thirty Monday and Wednesday?
 Bye.
 The gesture means that you can pull from the experiences you've gone through...pull them out in front and even in context see really why and the implications and...
 That does give me a clearer understanding of it.
 Sometimes you just do convey things immediately but sometimes not. 
 That illustrates the way you feel this thing has permeated.  I mean, has given you a chance to see why you've argued...
 ...for a modern painter...
 M-hm.  You have to let it come in your own experience to really appreciate the...
 ...revolutionary meaning it can have.
 Feel as though the kind of warmth that radiates in a situation of this kind isn't something that is caught even on a recording.
 There isn't any way it could be proved.
 I gather you'd like to kind of review some of those situations that, that you can look at somewhat humorously now.  But where at the time you had somewhat the feeling rather desperately of being in her clutches.
 M-hm. That really the significant things, or the most significant things, are not the situations that you went through, but some of the things that happened in you when you began...
 ...to lose faith and to feel maybe the world was right and you were wrong.  Is that...?
 Now let me see if I can put together my understanding of that.  That as there have been various social and intellectual pressures on you, that children should be brought up to live in the world and after all...that social scientists, we can see how important it is that people do adjust to the world and so forth.  You've found in yourself a good deal of inner resistance to that kind of thinking.  But it's in this experience that you've come to realize more deeply why you've resisted it.  It's because it seems to take care of everything but the core of the person; that it's just a superficial way of looking at adjustment, that somehow leaves out the very central aspects.
 M-hm.  That the real risk is in letting go of the care of yourself rather than in any of the other risks that one might think of.  Is that...?
 That you've known somehow at a level that just wasn't in your everyday knowing, and yet that somehow it is something you've known all along.
 Would this be pulling together several of the things you said?  That during the past year it's that core of yourself that almost got shaken, you pretty nearly did lose faith in it, but it's also the thing that you've come to really experience a belief in.
 So that you could say that most of the problems are all there, and there are many of them still unresolved and so forth, and it is quite true that in regard to many of them you don't know what you will do.  But I gather there are two things: that there is a feeling that in number of them, you do vaguely know what you're going to do, and that that merely waits for time to ripen that feeling...
 ...and that in regard to the others, they're no longer of concern to you.  That is that you feel a different confidence about them?  Is that...?
 M-hm.  Doesn't quite fit.
 It's just an inner feeling without a label, but...it will do.  It'll do.
 In other words, you can't label it because what it is will have to work itself out in life and in experience, hm?
 You can see how it might sound more negative to someone, but...as far as the meaning that it has for you is concerned, it doesn't seem as binding, as possessive I take it, as love.  It seems as though it actually is more...more expandable, more useable, than...
 ...any of these narrower terms.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  Where one is rid of the need of either rewarding or punishing then it just seems to you there is so much more freedom for all concerned.
 You don't expect it will be smooth sailing.
 Well, it's kind of an interesting by-product sort of thing because the stuttering in itself...
 ...is not something that concerns you.
 But it is something where, yes, you can probably see a whole pattern of things going...
 ...way into infancy.  For whatever it is worth.  
 Well I might use a minute of that time to just say that I don't think anyone ever gets over the kind of newness of the experience of being admitted into somebody else's life.  I gain from it.
 Something that has a very real meaning...
 Okay.
 I haven't mentioned it again because I haven't seen it yet.
 But I feel that way too.
 I think, too, you were...that once...you mentioned once that you might like to know who you could chat with this summer if any situation should come up that you...
 Well, I feel too that...I haven't any particular notion you'll use this, and yet I think that Mr.----------- would be the person to get in touch with.  Now he won't be here during August and I'm not sure he'd be able to see you himself, but if he could, he's awfully good, and if not he'll arrange for you to see somebody else.
 And may I just say too, I mean, I'm going to be here through the 15th of the month, so if you should feel you'd like to come back in to chat again, why...
 No.  I'm quite sure you don't.
 Well, I told them about the time of the movie that you should be credited with twelve interviews and I doubt if you've used those up.  I haven't checked either.
 I expect too that they'll be getting in touch with you to come in again for another round of tests.  You're long suffering at that.
 Goodbye.
 Turn it off?  
 I'll cut it off if you'd rather.  I just thought I'd like to...
 I just thought some of the aftermath might be interesting to hear too.
 No.
 I have very little second sight. 
 That it was when you...felt as to the meaningfulness of the relationship that stands as it is at a non verbal level pretty much.  That is that when you tried to bring the end point more explicitly into the thing, you feel you kind of...just muddled it up.
 That it may...though it wasn't particularly a part of your thinking, it may have been partly just to kind of test out for yourself the fact that you could come back, and partly perhaps just to sort of clarify this.
 Is this what you're saying, that...in regard to the real painfulness of the leaving experience, it seemed as though I might have been more helpful in regard to it.  Is that it?
 M-hm.  More statement of a fact and of your feeling about the fact.  Not a notion as to what might have been done.  M-hm.
 And you felt it was muddling the thing for you to cut that off because you knew you didn't...
 Your husband coming?
 Yes.  I dictated a letter before I went.  It's going out today.  Yes.  It's perfectly possible.
 Yes.  I felt sorry for that delay.
 My secretary was gone, then I left, and I...
 But you're wanting to tell me that you think he feels a little disappointed in not having heard already, and...
 No?
 Just feel no desire to quarrel with the way he sees things if that helps him to carry his own...
 
 M-hm.  It's very hard to live with this very deep sensitivity to what's going on in the other person's...even beyond what he is aware of within himself.
 It has put a capacity into your hands that you just hardly dare to believe you're big enough to handle.
 M-hm.  And I wonder...and this is guessing on my part.  It sounds as though the thing that makes that capacity disturbing is that it could be a capacity for hurting people as well as helping them.  And that you don't wish to hurt them.  Is that sort of...?
 That isn't it.  I see.
 But your feeling is that to understand them that deeply, this is a hurting thing in itself.
 That's one area you've really got to work with and know what to do with.
 Is this it a little bit more?  That it seems almost like leaving a very sharp edged sword right within the reach of someone whom you know is quite prone to temper tantrums or something of that sort?
 That what your feeling is, is almost a fear that you may misuse, due to tendencies in yourself, a...a very potent capacity.
 I'm sorry...
 That that's more a problem just within you inside the coat...how you live with, how you be a person that is out here in the open.
 I think I get the feeling that you see that as one of the things you'll be working on and doing something about...
 ...over quite a period of time, probably.
 I get the feeling, you can see that it would be satisfying, and in certain ways would be helpful.  But I certainly get the feeling that you don't quite think you would respect yourself as much if you made too free and easy a use of that type of satisfaction.
 So that though you do feel shaky as to whether you're through, and sometimes evidently that feeling is pretty darn strong, but...that you make the tentative judgment as I get it, that, yes, probably this part of it is through, though God knows, the experience is going on and on.
 M-hm.  That is an interesting idea, I must say.
 Let me...I mean, I don't want to drop that one idea completely.  If...I'd just like to say this in regard to this Clients Anonymous thing... It's a very nice term for it...we've sometimes thought of that too.  But nobody has done anything about it.  If it goes beyond the pipe dream stage with you, or you wanted to do something about it, it would probably be quite possible to develop a very small group of people who wanted to go on discussing their experiences.  I don't know...
 M-hm.  M-hm.
 In other words, the words...
 ...it isn't the words that had communicated, but the experience does communicate and give the words meaning and evidently to you at this point, yes, something that seems a very real meaning.
 
   I haven't much to say except that I think that two things cross my mind.  One is that...in regard to your reading these papers.  Later this fall or winter, probably November, or December, I have another book coming out that tries do to a better job of communicating what this is all about, even though I have very much the same feeling you've expressed, that...words don't get it across, but on the other hand if people have had experiences, then the words maybe convey meaning to them.
 At any rate, when it does come out, if you're interested in reading it, I'd be very much interested in your reactions.
 Because to me the...I can quite laugh off or talk away or disregard criticisms from people who I feel don't know experientially what I'm talking about.  But I would be very deeply interested in ideas, criticisms, reactions from people who do know experientially what I'm trying to talk about, and I would be quite interested in knowing whether...how it seems to you because I‚Ä¶
 And then I guess the only other thing I have any desire to say is the...really a rephrasing of what I said last time, that...I really feel very grateful to the people from whom I learn and...you're one of those.
 I guess there is one third thing I want to say, I've said before too.  For all I know, because I really don't have much any second sight on these things, you may feel shaky again, and whenever you do, the door is open.
 Okay.  That's all I wanted to say.
 M-hm.  Somehow I've been very much aware of that in you, and I think this remark crystalizes some of that for me, and I shall be more aware of it in others.  Not all clients, I would say, seem to have the awareness of predictability that you have.  And yet I guess they do have in subtle ways too.  Anyway that is something to watch for.
 And also, at least my feeling is...the therapist may have it in some general sense, and I think does.  But to the extent that the client has it, he has it in a much more specific sense.
 Because I may have an over-all notion of what I feel pretty certain will take place, but this interview or the next interview or ten interviews from now, no, I don't know.  I just don't know.
 But the client's feeling about it may well have more specificity than that.  I don't know.  At any rate it is...
 M-hm.  You're also saying that in a sense...this potential individual is always there and can be dealt with, where before your feeling was more that he exists at this level or that level or the other level.
 That carries a lot of meaning to me.  M-hm.
 Not in the least.
 Well, I'll be grateful for any leads you can give in that kind of thing, because I...I really do believe that a lot of the leads that have significance come to us from people who have the experiential basis, and I don't give a damn whether they have the intellectualistic basis or not.
 Yes.  It certainly can.
 One aspect of fun all along here is to watch people grow in a sense.
 Okay.
 Thank you.
 To be able to live some of the things you resolved within yourself, that wasn't so easy.
 You had to use that...
 By the last two records, you mean the last...
 ...two sessions?
 Yes-yes-yes.  Yes.  M-hm.
 Somehow you felt it was necessary to talk to the machine those times, and that seems to have pushed you into the next phase, is that...?
 You can't get in here without being vague. 
 Because if you haven't experience this clear awareness of yourself as you are, it would be mostly a word and you wouldn't know how to use it.  Is that...?
 Is isn't too important
 There's just an awfully sharp break between the-the functioning you were doing outside and the tremendous amount of thinking and resolving that you were doing...
 ...within and about yourself.
 It should be yours first...
 ... 
 Just an experience of it.
 Whether I was really to blame or whether you simply perceived it that way, after all, isn't too important , but the point is that at that time you felt very much that I was to blame, for somehow challenging you...putting a burden of responsibility on you.
 I'd kind of like to see if I can catch some part of that: that to really take responsibility for the notion that I, quote ‚ÄúI,‚Äù rather that a lot of other people is definitions of what I am, that when it finally...of course you had experienced it in a sense all along, but when it finally caught up with you, it really knocked you into real devastation for the time being, feelings of fear and desperation.
 M-hm.
 I get sort of a feeling there...this acceptance of that responsibility is, first of all a continuing thing; it's in a minor key, I mean, it-it has its elements of sadness and all, and yet somehow, there's something that frees you through that...through the acceptance of that responsibility.
 Doesn't anywhere near touch the depths of it or the breadth of it or the scope with it.
 There's something that doesn't ring right about that.
 Whatever the heck it was, that had .
 The essence of life is that after all it comes to a failure at the end in death and another aspect of it is...the correlate is the really accepting yourself as you are, then that is a piece of pessimism and yet in another way it isn't at all because, meeting it with resiliency or living it as a process can be completely optimistic.
 Much more meaningful than any shallow optimism.
 To you that whole construction gave a real meaning to life that you can stand by.
 That is, in a sense, you don't care whether for somebody else you can convey it, or if it's true or false for them.  For you it's real and it's brave and you can build on it.
 Whatever they understand by that, it doesn't even sample the meaning it has for you.
 So that in one sense, if you accept responsibilities for self, you do nothing about self except that you find yourself going on more and more freeing yourself, which if I understand you, probably the culture won't permit.
 Someway, at any rate, you think it isn't permissible.
 Seems to you as though the fact that this increasing freedom is going to be your undoing, that that is the real joke.
 
 The melody is there.
 You ought to have that privilege. .  Is once a week...
 ...reasonably satisfactory?
 M-hm.
 I think I get it, in here you just...you really let out a different aspect of yourself, and then when you leave the problem of going back is difficult.
 Decompression chamber .  M-hm, m-hm, there should be kind of a half-way station between here and ordinary living.
 M-hm.
 Well, I think I get that; at least I'd like to try it out.  Yes, you had some feelings toward me...that for a time seemed quite important but that as you look at it now -- as I understand it -- well, if you were going through a period where there was sufficient uncertainty in you that this thing might be important, that thing might be important, therefore, hard to evaluate it's true importance.  Does that get anywhere near?
 At any rate, it isn't quite like some of the other times in therapy, when perhaps it seemed quite important that I did understand what it was you were trying to express.  Now that really quite honestly doesn't seem too important, and yet there seems to be some other reason of which perhaps you are vaguely or tentatively aware for coming in even though communication isn't, isn't the major element there.
 I think so.  And even if it isn't too important to you, I'd like to make sure that...I'd like to check with you what you get out of it.  First of all, I get your feeling that, don't worry, you won't have to impose limits.  
 That's what I felt you meant.
 That's interesting.  I thought that, too.
 I almost brought that up tonight, at the beginning of the therapy hour.  I don't know quite what that was.  But after we got through I felt my viscera were telling me either I'm concerned, or she was annoyed with me, or something.  I really wasn't quite sure.
 Well, I'm not sure I do either, but it was true...very true.
 Maybe I did, maybe I did.
 No, I'm glad you did...that's something I wanted to make sure came out sometime.  Well, if I get the rest of what you're saying, it was that during the interviews...no, there was no particular feeling about me as a person, it was just that this was your situation, that that hit you afterwards while a lot of other things were evidently flowing into your experience too.  And that...well, I'm not quite sure about this, but then as you come back into contacts here it does become more clear that there wasn't anything particularly that you needed to do about that, is that it?
 There must have been something happening that wasn't really clear to you until afterwards.
 M-hm.  I think so.  A communication, on the level, and in a realm that is so far removed from the ordinary objective world.  Is that it?
 It felt as though, although you had talked about yourself, yet really, you had come to understand me very, very deeply.
 M-hm.
 What it really means is that...that love as it is culturally defined and understood is for you really fallacious because it means finding the-the reason or the justification for yourself in this other person.
 M-hm.  So that the feeling...  Is this what you're saying?  The feeling and affection I have toward myself can really perhaps become projected into another to the extent the other person is your love, your love really for yourself.
 M-hm.
 
 This is.
 Some of it's spontaneous.
 
 
 Does that have the meaning, I'm quite capable of entering into very deep relationships?
 In some as yet to be understood way, it really cost a good deal in some sense to...
 One of those things you...maybe you should somehow clarify a little in your own thinking...
 Attitude.  It's more in the face you present to the world.
 Our time is up anyway.
 If it covered that topic you thought you didn't want it.
 I see.
 M-hm.
 M-hm.
 M-hm.
 As near to it as you can come.
 M-hm.
 The last part of it is...I don't think I get that.
 M-hm.
 M-hm.
 Well I get the feeling that you're trying to phrase this kind of a-an idea, that it couldn't have been because of anything in me that you felt a...distrust, because after all...after a time it disappeared and you really felt quite free to come back in, and might it not be due to this other angle -- of recall -- which isn't quite clear to me, but I guess - I guess I'm leaning toward the other angle that it could have been because of imperfections in me, or something of that sort, rather than in you.
 Well, I'd like to say just a word more, and even though you may not like the feeling, I hope you'll feel perfectly free to say that too.  But I think that in my own experience, when I go through the-the vaguenesses, or the deepnesses or something that people have within them, there are times which I think grow fewer; if I didn't think that I would be unhappy -- in which I feel unsure -- yes this meant a great deal to the last person and to the person before that, but will it for this...or could this by any possible means be an exception -- and whether anything of that would be that which you sensed, I don't know, but I know that I have kind of felt it...this kind of thing maybe that...I don't know.
 I don't know.  No, I don't suppose so, really because I don't think that...at least if that were true...I don't know, at least I know in me the thing I'm talking about is much more intermittent than anything lasting.
 Well, for me unsuccessful isn't quite the right word.  I think with me it is...you go with a person into the unknown, which in my estimation is really what you do, and it's really unknown to both of you, and you want very much for it to turn out well for that person.  Yet being human, the thought can cross one's mind, or can cross my mind, that could be the wrong thing for this person; how do I know that this person should go into the unknown, and yet I realize that I certainly have facilitated that.
 M-hm.  That's what I decided, too.
 It's when I face that that I get out of that mood.
 Between choosing alternatives and really making some kind of a choice.
 As I understand that, this is the person that is me, and that is my choice.
 Important to be engaged in certain of these conflicts.
 That is, the kind of creativity that you find yourself releasing in yourself, maybe it has no home in-in this culture or maybe more broadly than that.
 M-hm.  That's why you have to gather strength to really live precariously.
 People could misunderstand that statement but nevertheless...
 M-hm, m-hm.  I'm embarked on an awfully dangerous course, and I'm a little concerned, is that it?
 That you're consciously aware of this...
 You mean it would be beyond the time table or the schedule?
 Does it really have any meaning to other than you, or are you in doubt, too?
 You're saying it's my meaning, but does it hang together, does is...
 It almost sounds as though you feel as though you should be able to accept reassurance...
 ...and facing the fact that you're not, and that for your personal comfort you'll have to face it some-some way or resolve it or something.
 That is somehow you feel you're betraying me, but you're...
 M-hm.
 M-hm.  Their desire to say you're worthwhile in your own right you feel...
 ...as something that-you betray something to accept this...would be...
 Are you suggesting at all that if I accept that reassurance, it's almost as if I'm saying that you surrender to-to this other person the choices, values and so on whereas I know that, I know the situation more than...more truly.
 M-hm.
 M-hm.
 Feeling, m-hm.  Other persons take a responsibility which they cannot possibly carry, but it leaves you with some necessity for dealing with it.
 You feel as though it ought to be possible...
 ...to take reassurance...
 A wide open question.
  Now maybe we'll have a solution .  I guess only to the extent that I can accept it from myself first.
 It plunges you back in.
 Next week?
   We can always hope.
 I think they're trying to conserve heat because of the rail strike.
 M-hm, m-hm.  That is the extent to which you must...
 ...get started right away.
 M-hm.
 It was around that that some of your own feeling clustered, around that point anyway, not that word necessarily.
 But you think you've sort of seen it yourself, I mean you sort of...
 M-hm.
 M-hm.
 M-hm, m-hm.
 It isn't a-a barrier inside.
 But you're feeling...
 ...you know what it was that you experienced, but you don't particularly want to bring it out.
 M-hm.  Some feeling of reservation as to the...
 M-hm, m-hm.
 The feeling seems pretty darn clear to you.
 Something of that kind of feeling.
 Maybe this is just a deep feeling of horribleness that's all yours and it can't be shared.
 M-hm.
 But perhaps the horror is there nevertheless, and that simply we are almost not permitted to recognize it in ourselves, only as it exists outside of ourselves.
 They'll simply be there more or less inevitably because of this deeper horror that exists within, is that...?
 M-hm, m-hm, m-hm.
 At a different level, m-hm.  So guilt, for example, you may feel and feel quite fully, and yet, as I get what you're saying, it is rooted in or involved in some deeper experience of horror which you feel is really very basically a part of life, not only of your life perhaps, but much broader.
 Feel that it is just sort of is.
 As you try to understand why was it so hard to bring out this dark point of view, you believe it's something in me that made it hard to do.
 M-hm.
 You say I'm rewarded when really I should have been rejected.
 M-hm, m-hm.
 At this point some types of distortion that have occurred because of that situation in me, make it difficult for you.
 But I gather that it...
 You think that...
 Really cheated...
 M-hm.
 M-hm, m-hm.
 M-hm.
 Somehow in that phrase...
 ...there's a discrepancy...
 ...between what you wanted and what you willed...
 That somehow the relationship perhaps was a real element in enabling you to feel at a pretty deep level that there is such a thing as choice.
 I'm sorry, I didn't get that? 
 Where does the State Department come in?  
 A good question, too.
 M-hm.
 You feel that there aren't any of these feelings that you might have had.
 M-hm.
 You feel that it isn't possible for him to feel and as far as you're concerned you really...
 M-hm, m-hm, m-hm.  For yourself you wish in some ways you could be more sentimental, wish you felt more sentimental.
 M-hm, a little bit you're putting on.
 Well...
 No, I'm afraid we haven't, our time is about up.
 It sort of puzzled me.  I felt last time that you felt some sort of antagonistic feeling when I brought your hat out to you.
 Well, that's what I felt; that somehow to you it was a battle and that somebody was winning a round and that now I realize you felt that somehow in that struggle, that I had won the round.
 Sorry to have had trouble.
 But at least, there was the realization...
 ...suddenly it hit you...he had been in the same chair.
 And what difference does that fact make, and you couldn't express that.
 You just knew that psychologically...
 ...you shut him off from that out.
 That is you felt it exerted some pressure on him.
 And you weren't sure whether you were...
 ...
 Are you saying that in some degrees, you sort of, hmmm...in a little devious ways, intended maybe, that it should have that effect.  Is that what you're saying?
 You intended it to be a little pressure.
 I'm not quite sure I catch that last; but is it that you really...part of the motivation was hoping that he would stay in this long enough to get somewhere.
 That's kind of an intellectual...
 ...resolution, but still, the feeling is...
 ...by God, if he stayed with it long enough...
 ...it will help him.
 Could still continue...
 ...available.
 It was in part a protest...
 ...in part, a protest, and in part a wish for him.
 It may be a new direction, but I feel very grateful for knowing what the hell it was that...for the first session, yes, that was me and I can toss that out.  But what was wrong last time?  I was kind of searching myself.
 That I fully appreciate, that isn't the kind of thing that disturbs me.  .
 You felt you were failing to meet the same kind of demands...
 ...you were making of me in other circumstances.
 But in some way that you don't understand and don't understand how you could have been blind to it before.
 You find that it isn't so necessary to protest against being a woman.
 It's just impossible that this internal thing that you never expressed outwardly, in talk, yet somehow, is sensed in a way that actually makes the reaction different.
 The real awareness of it, is that what you're grateful for?
 
 You feel there's a certain amount of privilege in suddenly discovering, I am a woman...
 ...and that's alright.
 Better than that.
 You feel that that sums it up for you.
 I'd like to make sure I get that.  Is it that if the things that happen, happen just because in some subtle way, my personality has an influence on yours and you really were doing something for me in opening up yourself and so on, then really, that's no go: it's dangerous, uncertain and futile.  And yet, as you consider that, that just wouldn't contain the experience; that just isn't enough to explain it.  Is that...?
 Everything.
 
 That is, we're delving into issues that are quite deep, really in every way.
 To experience it again, to know where it fitted, and how.
 You mean, a different situation...
 ...where some of the same feelings arose...
 ...and could be quite understood and...
 As I get it, that was quite a clarifying experience because...
 ...it didn't give...well, the question of, was I distorting and so on, in regards to the experience with me, with your husband and so on, well, put those sort of in context that, yes, I can feel this way toward a sensitive person; it seems to give me a chance to be myself, it just happens, that's all.
 M-hm.  M-hm.
 I'm not completely sure I get that, but as I understand it, it is that your different experience, these kind of checking experiences, have confirmed two things: one that, well, I do feel this way towards certain people and it's alright, that's me, that's the way I feel...
 ...and that another person -- and maybe I didn't understand this -- and another person can have feelings like that, too, and I can understand that.  Is that...?
 If this was just all self-contained and didn't have any...
 ...carry-over value, why, it certainly wouldn't have...
 Is this it?  That you're saying that our relationship has been very meaningful, that in the future, it looks as though that would be ended, and I would be just a book...and that, you feel, is fairly necessary in terms of the culture.  Yet, you can't help but look with a certain amount of contempt upon the artificial realities that the culture imposes.
 This time you would be...
 ...really finished.
 You're not trying to be dogmatic about this, but it's just the feeling...
 ...about it.
 It seems like a slightly lonesome and risky affair.
 So that loneliness that comes from being you, you'll take and...
 ...you wouldn't trade if for anything.
 Feeling that it is certain to be a losing battle in some way, and yet...
 ...yet, you wouldn't back out of it.
 That's kind of...paradoxical...
 ...rejoicing in, I don't know what terms, something negative that...
 Feel that you can really see some of the struggling things as being oh, unpleasant in one sense, but not negative.  Does that catch any of that?
 At any rate you feel that it's one point where kind of persistently  I haven't quite been able to understand your perception of it.
 I guess you're saying that description sounds paradoxical, and to you, it really isn't; it's all one piece.
 It might be flavored with a little contempt.
 Not quite supposed to have that feeling and so you wonder, should I?
 I'm not sure I got that.
 When it's contempt as seen out here that seems pretty undesirable, yet when you bring it back to the personal aspect, in certain instances it exists.
 Rather a different feeling in the personal realm, from what it is when judged as a social issue.
 Almost  no sure answer to this question.
 These generalizations serve as excuses someway or other when not facing certain things closer to home perhaps.
 Is this feeling there that if that much is assumed, that you are basically good and so on, then that prohibits you from really looking at life as it is for you, I mean it has already settled one portion of it presumably.
 There were words that you used, and used rather frequently, and all of a sudden it kind of strikes you, they're true.  I am afraid of certain aspects, of certain areas of life.
 And if you were seeing it clearly, you surely would be afraid.
 That in some way they are both parts of the same coin or something or other...
 ...being fearful of certain things, in some ways has its counterpart in the fact that you are also quite fearless.
 I think it does.  That it's only when the...oh, the more clear out feeling of fear that exists in us here, is blocked off close to you, that then somehow it develops into this more nameless, more indescribable kind of fear that is anxiety.
 What developed in that unhealthy type of fear.
 Because you can't recognize your fear as it is right in you, then it can become that unhealthy vague fear that seems outside of you.
 A poet?
 No.
 Possibly he's trying to express something of the thing...
   
 Just that here are some extra things that are going through my feelings and here they are, though they are not really important.
 But it isn't necessary that I bring them up here.
 Well, I get two feelings here.  I'm not sure I do get every aspect of that, but I get the feeling of what you are saying first is that in this whole sexual area, where it was so costly to you to look at it all, that somehow there has been an opening up, there has been a change, a very real change in you.  And that part of the situation at the present time, is that yes, the hostilities are there, I'm aware of them, more than before, but in your present way of living all this, it's not a bad feature...it's not a negative thing; it's now somehow a part of the positive picture.
 An area that was sensitive is no longer a retarding factor.
 Somehow there has been a lessening of this bitterness.
 I'm not quite clear there, whether you mean the factors that brought on the bitterness.
 That's something you wouldn't want to possess again for anything.
 Even the thought of that possibility is a fearful one.
 That it really is taking a very genuine gamble to venture with people into the realization that choices are possible.
 Well, all those thoughts have occured to me, all right, I think I understand them.
 Tell?  No;
 My own feeling is that, if a person has ever had anything in his experience of that sort, so that he knows inside, some inkling of what this is about, then you can tell him, it makes sense, you can talk about it together and so on.  Otherwise telling doesn't help.
 I think he doesn't know half the time.
 As I understand that, you feel that the essence of this is there is a, that need for a type of love that can exist regardless of whether it is...oh, paid off as it were.
 Maybe this puts my meaning, and I think it's your meaning, a little better.  That there is a need for a love that isn't possessive and that just exists.
 I'll have to mull it over.
 And when even love gets outside, then it becomes something really quite different and in a sense has sort of lost the feeling that is inside that is most meaningful?
 It's in a minor key.
 Our time is up.
 Next week?
 That is in some sense not deserving, not being able to measure up to this.
 Somebody believes that you are basically good, and is reacting in that belief...your reaction is against that, because that isn't sound.
 Yeah. 
 If I can understand that, I'm not quite sure how that ...
 You say, that one reason that you do react against it is that assuring you that you're basically fine, and I mean, it just doesn't have that effect and that's one reason for it.
 I'd like to see if I can recapture that whole thing.  When your friend first told you that you had really been the core of the group, you had a number of reactions.  First, oh, don't be absurd.  The next feeling, could I really have been that meaningful, am I that much of a person?  And then thinking of all the reasons, why factually, that isn't true, and besides I have so many facets of a person in that group that couldn't possibly have been any cohesive force.  And then thinking about the whole issue, beginning to realize that possibly one thing that assurance can convey is the feeling that I'm a complex person with strong points, weak points, various aspects of myself, and I want you to know that I can go along with you being equally a complex separate person.
 That maybe he thinks it does rest on goodness?
 This may not...this is the feeling I get from that...I'm not quite sure that I caught you correctly: you're saying perhaps I can really receive re-assurance if I can understand that it is divorced from this concept of goodness and that it's just giving me a certain amount of approval and liking for what I am, but even that is followed by a little bit of concern that the other person really thinks I'm good.
 The main thing is that you get it.
 And mine may have been a little off the beam because I kept thinking -- and I'm not sure how much this was in it -- that if someone was expressing a really positive feeling toward you, a feeling of approval, reassurance, you would find that pretty hard to take.
 And if you thought it were that, that would be very, very hard to accept.
 M-hm.  It would be an over simplification sort of business.
 Almost too rich to take.
 Somehow those feelings that you caught clarified things for you till it brought this into a clear and clear focus, is that...?
 And really sort of, if I get part of that, in a sense helps you perhaps in directions that you wanted to go.
 As you say internally it certainly wasn't the context that did it, it was somehow that that just happened.
 M-hm.  Another evidence really in this sphere, as well as in many others where you have experienced it: I can trust my own judgment of, appreciation of, understanding of the situation.
 There's a real deepening of the confidence that you feel in yourself, because the things you have vaguely and tentatively and then more clearly seen about this, check, and they seem to be right.
 This is, sort of mystical.
 That on some fairly fundamental level, it seems to you that it does have a similarity to some of these experiences that go under the word religious, but not with any of the institutional or...
 ...formal connotations.
 It would be horrifying to him.
 Just kind of a frightening realization.
 I'd like to be clear in the meaning of that, and I'm not quite sure: you read this unfavorable review...
 ...to which you reacted in parallel fashion?
 No.  I gather then, it must be a good book, is that...?
 From the criticism, felt it must be good.
 
 Just to follow that up; but it wouldn't be denied and turned out to be a part to yourself, those different experiences, is that what you're saying?
 You have quite a gift for saying things.
 No, that isn't the important thing.
 That's what I get out of a lot of these things you've been saying.  That you've checked these things enough that you can be comfortable about them.
 It seems as though this time you let part of yourself watch me in operation while you were working with yourself.
 You've been aware of it with appreciation.
 Call halt, or call a halt?
  But it's really a sort of a double problem, that you would like pregnancy to be something you would enjoy, and, uh, yet when you began to enjoy it, you lost the twins. Ah, and now it really is a confusing situation, isn't it? Wanting a child very much, wanting that miracle, yet not being sure.
  Ah, that's where the past comes in.
  It might end in tragedy again.
   Uhm, hmm, so it's a recurring issue.
  Uhm, hmm, uhm, hmm, so it's something that really has been quite bound up in you.  You haven't felt free to talk about it.
"  ""Should I have laid aside my career a little earlier and tried to become pregnant?"" Uh.."
"  And so you're asking, ""Did I make a mistake?"""
"  ""Did I make a very grave error in not having made the attempt sooner?"""
"  There's a lot of pressure toward, ""You must have a child, you must."""
"  I'm not quite sure, it's just ""win or lose"", and you have lost?"
  So that's one game, a very important game, that you feel you've lost.
  And you're the kind that likes to win.
  So you'd like to not only satisfy yourself, but all these other people, too.
  It just means a tremendous lot.
  So that if you don't have a child, that really leaves a, a terrible gap.
  A big void, uhm, hmm.
 You feel cheated out of something that would enrich your marriage as well as you.
 Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, I can understand that. That, uh, it's the kind of thing where mentioning it might, might be, superstitiously wrong or something, I mean it might, uh, . . .
 Uhm, hmm, so it really is something highly personal and kept within, and easier to talk about with strangers than it is to people who mean a lot to you.
 Uhm, hmm.
 You don't want to lead them on and then‚Ä¶
  ...then go another tragedy.
  Uhm, hmm. That was very hard.
  Ah... I see, uhm, hmm.  If you keep it to yourself, then it it all works out, great for everybody,
  But if it's a tragedy again, that's for you alone.
  Uhm, hmm.
"  Uhm, hmm.  ""Could I have made a difference, could I have done something differently?"" Uhm, hmm."
"  Uhm, hmm.  So your mind says you were doing as well as you could possibly do, but something in you says, ""Well, but, maybe, maybe you could have done something. You were the keeper, and you did lose."""
" Uhm, hmm, ""I'm a winner."""
"  So it would look as though, ""Oh, you've got everything."" Not quite, not the important thing you want."
  Yeah, yeah... uhm, hmm. So that at some level, to yourself you're a failure.
  That's right.
  That's right. There are some things you can't manipulate, you can't control.
  And you're the kind of person who's accustomed to controlling things, getting things your way.
  Uhm, hmm.  In a lot of ways that's worked fine, but not here.
  I didn't get the last..
"  Uhm, hmm. That seems to be evidence to you, ""There must be something wrong with me."""
  So this body of yours is something that in this respect you really can't control.
  That there's no reason at all for not having a child except that you don't have one.
  So that brings that sense of failure.
  Uhm, hmm, if there were some sacrifice you could make in return for having a child, sure, you'd make it.
 That really touches you, that you just promise to do everything right,
 If‚Ä¶
  But it's hard not to have the control.
  Hmm, that sounds as though there's some grieving over what might have been.
 That tragedy keeps being lived over again.
 Especially perhaps at this season.
 So the grief is still there.
  It can hit you.
  Mm, sorry?
  You know I can't feel it in my body what you feel in yours, but at least I have made it easier for you.
"  ""But I realize I really can't control this.  As much as I'm accustomed to controlling, much as I'd like to be able to control it, I cannot control this."""
 You say that doesn't keep you from feeling something of a failure.
" ""In some sense I've failed."""
  Maybe not you.
"  ""I did what I could do so I'm not the failure, that isn't it exactly."""
  Almost a bodily feeling, isn't it?
  But something in you says something might have been done.
  Feeling that you're not really fulfilled.
  Sounds like a real sadness you carry around with you.
  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.. Are you saying in some ways this made you stronger or more able to meet life?
  Uhm, hmm.  So that in spite of the grief and the loss, some good things emerged from it.
  I'm sorry?
 That's a very deep wish.
 I see that our time is almost up, is there anything more that you want to say?
 OK, thank you.
  Hold it. You, because they may want to ask you questions as well as me. Um, after we‚Äôve, uh, when we‚Äôve sat here for just a minute, uh, possibly you‚Äôd be willing to think back and say how the interview seemed to you and I‚Äôll say how it seemed to me. And maybe we could let them in and let them ask questions of us. Would that be okay?  And can, uh, maybe Ruth can join us too and we can all take part. Do you want to say how the interview seemed to you?
  So, I‚Äôm interested in the fact that,  uh, you feel you‚Äôre late in coming to your feelings, late in knowing them. And now... it‚Äôs like this fear  when they do strike that they really pour over you‚Ä¶
  And they make you ineffective.
  But you liked your own courage.
  I can see it in your face.
  Whether your fear is unreasonable, or not, it‚Äôs very real to you.
  So it‚Äôs not just blocked in one way, but in a lot of ways.
  Whatever it might be for anybody else, but for you, it‚Äôs brave...
  When you first started in, you said that you wanted to talk about death. Did I misunderstand you?
  That you didn‚Äôt say that?
  Okay.
  Okay. Then I misunderstood you.  I‚Äôm sorry for the interruption then.
  You want to be in touch with your feelings but you don‚Äôt want to drown in them.
  You feel very sure that all you could possibly do would be to take care of yourself in a situation like that.
  Um... So you feel, uh, sort of ashamed of your sensitivity and of your, of your feelings that are so strong, not worthy of an adult?
  I sort of think of you going to get the blood sample you were sure you might faint and fearful.  Actually you went quickly, had it done, and it was okay.
  You did better than you... than you were going to do...
  You think and think...
  To do something...
  You want to know in advance.
  That‚Äôs interesting. If something that‚Äôs said or done in the group gets really close to the inside you,  uh, you‚Äôre afraid, but you also go off to deal with it  by yourself,  not in the group.
  Yeah. This, this, uh, tendency to do everything alone, and by yourself  is something you‚Äôre proud of and pleased with,  and yet you feel that it leaves out something.
  So for you, this is the safer way, but maybe not the best way.
  You‚Äôre feeling that right now?
  Okay. So, while you were sad, you were in the middle of something and feeling good.
  So, you feel kind of proud and courageous, and this time that you‚Äôre with someone,  that you‚Äôre dealing with something with someone  beside you.
  Living in the experience  is so much better than  wheels going round and round.
  When you‚Äôre alone you really blow it?
  And there‚Äôs something about this mulling business that you feel is not mature.
  Maybe it doesn‚Äôt come by trying. Hm.
  Will this really mean anything that will change anything?
  Mmh. We‚Äôre together. You‚Äôre with me.
  That‚Äôs sort of a new thought that in so many ways you keep trying for maturity, trying for this or trying for that, always,  it‚Äôs always the future that  matters.
  And perhaps that‚Äôs one way in which this is different  in that this matters now.
  That‚Äôs not the essence of it.
  I can... I can see that glow and that‚Äôs the main thing, right?
  And then there‚Äôs this sort of nagging sense that,   ‚ÄúYeah, but are you  getting any place,  are you doing this.‚Äù
  The glow has partly to do with being with me and partly with the group as a whole.
  But I get a sense of two poles there.   You want to do it all by yourself yet you realize, ‚ÄúI like the attention of the group.‚Äù
  ‚ÄúI want to be alone, but it‚Äôs very nice to be together with...‚Äù
  It sounds as though that being alone is not just being by yourself. It‚Äôs something deeper than that, that you really are alone.
  It depends on when you want it, but, but you shut yourself up from asking for it because you feel, ‚ÄúOh, no that‚Äôs‚Ä¶ oh, it‚Äôs inappropriate.‚Äù
  It depends on when you really want attention,  but you don‚Äôt ask for it because you feel, ‚ÄúNo, no, that would be inappropriate.‚Äù
  I can understand how deeply _______ful that you feel in situations where you‚Äôd like to help, sometimes you‚Äôre not only not a help, you‚Äôre a... you‚Äôre an extra burden?  And that you don‚Äôt like about yourself.
  You have your standards though.
 You feel it‚Äôs stupid, it‚Äôs silly, and anybody would know that.
  It feels not just that I‚Äôm making a statement about myself. Everybody would make the same judgement about it.
  I‚Äôm not quite clear, you forgot what you were going to say? Is that?
  Yeah. So you start out feeling, ‚ÄúI pay so much attention such little things,‚Äù and then somehow that triggers something of you that is deep enough that you do not hear it.
 I'm afraid we‚Äôre gonna have to stop  in a few minutes.
  Mhm. You didn‚Äôt, you didn‚Äôt experience the fear?
  That‚Äôs what you were talking about, but it wasn‚Äôt what you were experiencing.
 Fear is the stepping stone that kind of led to beyond.
  Maybe that‚Äôs what you really wanted.
  Okay to stop now?
  I‚Äôd like to tell the...  When... uh...if you feel ready to, um, I‚Äôd like you to tell the group how this seems to you and then I‚Äôll say how it seemed to me.
  .
  Uh huh.
  Anything else you want to say right now?
  Well, it‚Äôs...it, uh, it‚Äôs uh...it felt good to be with you.   Uh, It seemed to me too that the only thing that you experienced was this, this glow, um. That, that seemed to me  to be true too. And, uh, that didn‚Äôt seem to have too much to do with the words, um.  I guess, I also felt that, um, you were in some relationship to me. I felt eager to be in even closer relationship with you.  Uh... but that, but that you were also in relationship with this whole group, in a way that that was rather different.
  Because often when I‚Äôm meeting someone like this, it becomes just the two of us in the room no matter what.
  But here the group was very much present to you and therefore to me too.
  Um. I don‚Äôt know either what the, uh‚Ä¶ whether this will make any significant difference to you, um, because it wasn‚Äôt, in my estimation, it wasn‚Äôt a dramatic interview. It was just the two of us together, uh, experiencing something together.
  Right. I guess that‚Äôs all I have to say too now, before I answer questions.
  And if you‚Äôd be glad to answer questions too?
  Anybody want to make comments or raise questions?
    My name is Dr. Rogers and I'm... I want to tell you a little bit of why... I wanted to... talk to you tonight. I'm interested in people who come to this hospital and I'm also interested in trying to learn how we can be of more help to them in the future. That's why; you‚Äôre all wrapped up and I'm all tucked up. Now, what I would like would be for you to tell me anything you‚Äôre willing to tell me about yourself and your situation. How you feel about yourself in your situation... or I guess another way of putting it is that... well... anything you're willing to tell me that would help me to know you better, I'd be very glad to hear.
   Wherever you would like to.
   So that you were left with no friends at all... and am I getting it right that you feel that this was due basically to your eye-condition or...?
    So that you feel: here is this one girl that you like, even if she doesn't have a very good reputation and your friends from way back, but that your husband won't let you  associate with them.
    You feel: you need  to have some chit-chat...
    So, if he is not really going to pay much attention to you then you feel  you can do that too...
    So that's another thing you don't like. You don't quite like the situation your mother is in and you don't like him, because he acts like he is married to her.
    You feel, she wants him to stay, but you... you certainly don't like that arrangement, is that it?
    Hm. Sounds as though yon feel pretty resentful of that.
   I'm sorry, I didn't get that...
   I see. Hm, hm.
  Hmhm... Hmhm. So I guess you‚Äôre saying: ‚ÄúI'm not the only one that feels that way about her and her situation.‚Äù
  You feel that your mother and your husband and everybody tries to run your life.
  Hmhm. Here I was old enough to have a child and yet nobody thinks I can make my decisions or run my own life. Is that what you say?
  I guess you‚Äôre saying: ‚Äúthat kind of shows that... when we are just by ourselves we really get along better.‚Äù
   You feel: she's just a gossip and you feel she doesn't like you . . .
   No doubt about that.
  That really concerns you that that was kept from you and it concerns you that maybe you didn't deal with her right, not... not knowing that she was crippled.
 Hmhm. It sounds as it you're saying: I kind of trusted my mother on this and then, by golly: she was not to be trusted . Hmhm.
 Hmhm. You feel, when you went home, whatever went wrong you took the blame for it within yourself.
 ... whether you had done it or not. Is that...?
 Hmhm. It isn't so much that you felt you were to blame, but... that others blamed you.
 I guess you feel that was sort of true with everybody except with your father? Is that eh...
 That things went somewhat better between you and your father.
 Those are kind of pleasant memories... ... ... I don't know but it sort of looks as though thinking about those things makes you feel a little bit weepy or am I wrong?
 A little bit, hmhm.
 It's hard to remember all, eh?
 That's something that is so far back it's kind of vague and yet certain parts of it evidently are very  vivid to to you. You can remember his being... not coming back and you can remember  your mother being angry, but mostly you can remember this spooky, wild ride with him trough the storm...  and your fear that you might crash up and he is holding you with his arm around you.
 Am I getting this right that even after that, it just seemed to you as though you and your father were headed for a cliff.
 Hm, hm. So that somehow just as you wanted to do things right when you were... get proper credits and so on... when you were young, now you feel as though: why, I'd like to be attractive to other men...  Even though I am married, so to say you feel: I missed out on something.
 Hm, hm, you feel: I can't really protect myself  against either fellows or girls because I just can't... I just can't hurt somebody.
 You feel... I... I can't strike back because there is the feeling that if I should... if I should protect myself, defend myself, strike back, then that would kill the other person and then I'd be punished.
 Hm, hm. You don't really think of it but...
 ... somehow that's the way it feels to you...
 ... that if you ever struck back then someone struck at you, that would kill him.
 But at least you feel: see, when I was young, I didn't have this fear, I... when he bit me I bit him back...
 ... even bit him harder than I meant to.
 Hm. ‚ÄúHow did I get that fear that if I strike out it really would u he fatal for the other person?‚Äù
 I didn't hear...
 Hmm... Hmm.
 Is it making you tired?
 Does it... are you saying that, because it feels as if it makes you tired?
 Hm, hm. It sounds as though you somehow let down a little.
 Hm, hm. But there's always the feeling: look out... look out... be careful of what you say, because even that may drive somebody away.
 Hm, hm. It isn't... it isn't really as clear to you as what I said, it's more that... maybe that is...
 Hm?
 The oozy kind eh? Hm, hm. Just in a vague sort. of way... maybe that's what you feel underneath or something like that.
 That was just an awful dream of things, kind of smothering you and you wondered what meaning that did have.
 Some big thing was really falling on you and smothering you.
 Hm, hm. Almost as though it seemed like the cloud was sort of swallowing... swallowing you up... something like that. Is that....?  Hm, hm. 
 It sounds as though perhaps this is what you're saying that when you really think back and try to understand your childhood, then you feel: gosh, I'm not so sure about my father, he surely... seemed to be... harsh?
 Hm, hm. Yet you know that you don't really have many thoughts or memories of him and whether that's because you try to... or whether it is because you put then, out of your mind or whether it is just that you have too many worries of your own.
 So you just feel... gee...
 It 's been a relief  to be away from home, I . . .
 Well...
 Hm, hm. So at first you just couldn't understand it, but now at least you feel: well, it isn't... it isn't too bad.
 You just feel really surprised at yourself that... by golly you could tell them some of the things you've been thinking and feeling.
 Hm, hm. You just feel kind of strong and pleased that you were able to... ... tell them what you felt.
 Let's say you feel part of the change  is in you, that earlier,  yes, you wanted their pity and you wanted then, to feel sorry for you, but now you feel: ‚ÄúI'm married and I'm... I'm able to make my own choices.‚Äù
 That would be better than nothing . Hm, hm.
" You feel: ""I just don't have a chance to be a person... Everybody is all ready""  to be ""me"" for me."
 It is as if you feel: a lot has happened today. 
 Hm, hm. You always feel pretty sure that...
 ... that if there is any choice, if there is any choice they would rather prefer the other person.
 I've got to stop in a minute or two and... I'm sorry but...
 Hmm?
 Would you like to or not?
 Hm hm... feels that it helps just to be lying down.  Hm hm.
 Hm hm. Well I guess I feel as though I really had gotten to know you quite a bit in this time. I feel you really have been able to tell me who you are and I guess... ... I just like to say: good luck to you as you try to be yourself and... have your own life.
 Hm, hm. If you can be yourself that would... would feel as though....as  though a new soul had come into you.
 You're not defeated.
 Good. Well I do have to go and I appreciated talking with you and I really do hope that things go well for you... And the girl will come in in just a minute and she'll take off the harness... ... Bye...
 A different‚Ä¶ I missed one word, a different what?
 A different value system.  Uhm, hmm.  Uhm, hmm.
 I understand.
 Uhm, hmm.  So that the difference in values really sort of, sets you apart and starts you quarreling, and you‚Äôre afraid you might even lose him?
 You might find yourself giving into his values and his ideas and losing yourself.
 It sounds as though there is no middle, middle road and if you, if you accept his value system then yours just goes down the drain.
 That‚Äôs what makes it so difficult.  It‚Äôs, you don‚Äôt want him to give up his value system just to adopt yours, and give himself up.  But you don‚Äôt want to give up your value system to accept his either.  And uh, you don‚Äôt know whether you can persuade him, you don‚Äôt know whether you can find that middle road where you might be able to find some agreement.
   So you‚Äôre raising the whole question, ‚ÄúIs it really productive to discuss so much about these value systems?  Maybe that‚Äôs um, maybe that‚Äôs not the best way.‚Äù
   It sounds as though you care for him, but you really can‚Äôt go forward unless you can come to some sort of an understanding about your different beliefs and values.
 Can, can you say what some of the sharpest of those value differences are?
 Only one piece.
 It sounds as though you felt he was really being stingy.  He wasn‚Äôt willing to spend enough for his friend.
 So it was more that he had no, no aesthetic judgment, no sense of beauty.  That‚Äôs what, really uh, made you annoyed.
 It sounds as though he doesn‚Äôt appreciate beauty, and then there are other things, and other things that have piled up and you begin to feel, ‚ÄúOh, no good.‚Äù
 That isn‚Äôt quite clear to me.  I understand it might be easy to break off the relationship.   But uh, then you feel you might have to obey him, or he might have to obey you?  I‚Äôm not quite clear on that.
 Oh I see.  Do you want to say that?     You‚Äôre, you‚Äôre working in the same place with him?    I see.  What, and does he have to take orders from you, or do you have to take orders from him?
 I understand you‚Äôd like to keep it.  But in the work place, uh is he the boss, or are you the boss?
 The same, I see.
 It would be very nice if you could just change him into the sort of person you would like to have him.  But then you think, ‚ÄúNo, that wouldn‚Äôt be quite what I would want either.‚Äù
 If you tried to change him over, you wouldn‚Äôt feel good about it inside.
 So you can only accept him when he feels the way that you feel.
 So when you feel, ‚ÄúI want him to be just like I want him to be,‚Äù then you feel, ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs pretty arrogant of me.‚Äù   But you don‚Äôt see any way of changing that arrogance in yourself.
 So in these courses with Professor Suge, uh, doing what you could to express your feelings and your beliefs and your values, but in you‚Äôre practical, private life, you find it‚Äôs very hard to express your values and your convictions and your attitudes, especially if they‚Äôre negative ones.
 So when expressing your feelings didn‚Äôt work, when it seemed to hurt, then there were times you wish you could just blot yourself out.
 ‚ÄúWhy, why is it that he can‚Äôt understand me, or why doesn‚Äôt he think the same way I do?‚Äù  It‚Äôs that kind of question that comes to your mind.
 So-, sounds like a somewhat stormy relationship.
 You know that it‚Äôs a difficult relationship, and you‚Äôd like to preserve it, but it‚Äôs going to take a great deal of energy on your part to, to hold that relationship together.
 This isn‚Äôt a casual thing; it‚Äôs something that has a lot of importance to you.   You really would like to preserve that relationship, ‚ÄúBut, but, but how?‚Äù
 You keep searching for ways that might, build the relationship.
 A very good relationship?
 So you see a very clear pattern in your own parents in how to keep a relationship smooth.  When there‚Äôs any real difference, and it looks as though there‚Äôs going to be a quarrel, your mother says, ‚ÄúYou‚Äôre right.  I‚Äôm wrong.‚Äù
 You really don‚Äôt know what‚Äôs going on within your mother when she, gives in like that.
 If I understand that right, sometimes with your friends you say, ‚ÄúAlright, you‚Äôre right, I‚Äôm wrong.‚Äù  But that doesn‚Äôt work very well.
 When you say something that‚Äôs not true to your own feelings, you feel very upset.
 So you‚Äôre living through a whole new pattern of how to, how to get along.
 You wish very much that I could give you some kind of, that would help in the, with the resolution of that problem.
 I‚Äôll simply speak from my own experience, and I‚Äôm not sure that it applies to you.
 I don‚Äôt accept the other value system as mine; I accept it as belonging to the other person.   And if I was talking to your boyfriend, I might say, uh,  ‚ÄúI realize that beauty doesn‚Äôt mean much to you, it means a lot to me.‚Äù
 That‚Äôs why when you asked me for an answer, I gave you what was an answer for me, but I realize that may not be an answer for you at all.
 I guess you‚Äôre saying that the closer the relationship, the harder it is to accept any difference in values.
 You were opposite there.  If your husband felt really opposite from you, very, very different, that would be very upsetting.  It would also be upsetting if he didn‚Äôt care anything about beauty and you did?
 Are you saying that if, if you felt the small differences in value and you didn‚Äôt, you did not express them they would pile up and pile up?
 Sounds as though you recognize it would be a good thing to express differences of feeling, sometimes the risk seems too great.
 The morning conversation makes you think, even more frightened about the future.  Maybe the marriage, I would change, maybe I would lose my identity, the way she did.
 And I won‚Äôt try to speak for her, but I think if you were aware of that risk it‚Äôs much less likely to happen.
 It sounds as though something you experienced within yourself even though you‚Äôre not quite sure of the meaning or how you would put it in words.
 Ok, shall we stop?  Do you want to say something else?
 I missed your last word, if you say something to your partner, what?
 Forcing him, uhm, hmm.
 There are times I think, when the differences are too great to, to be together as partners.  I didn‚Äôt really hear you mentioning any great big, difference between you.
 So much depends on the attitude of acceptance, I feel.  I accept the fact that he‚Äôs a person who just picks one little flower, who doesn‚Äôt see the beauty of the whole thing.  If I really accept that, then that‚Äôs not forcing him.
 I, I, I hear you saying, I hear you saying, ‚ÄúI wish he felt the same way I did.‚Äù
 I‚Äôm sure that all family relationships there‚Äôs a great deal of pressure ‚ÄúI want you to think just the way I do.‚Äù
 Shall we stop?
    I gather you feel a lot of fear about taking the next step or really stopping coasting and really getting involved in what you want to do.
   Can you say any more about that fear? What's the feeling of fear?
   You just feel, ‚ÄúI'm not up to it.  I don't know enough.  I‚Äôm, I might be nervous.  I might be, I might fail. I'm just uh, I'm really not up to it.‚Äù
   Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  So you discount even your knowledge feeling, ''I didn't really take it in. I haven‚Äôt really assimilated it. I just memorized it.‚Äù
   You got high grades but they don't mean anything, really.
    So that you know intellectually that you don't give yourself credit for some of the things that you've done better.
    Sort of an escape?
    So there again, with someone you're always judging yourself and feeling, ‚ÄúWell, am I boring? Am I entertaining enough? Am I doing it right?‚Äù  And coming out with pretty negative feelings about yourself.
 You feel very self-conscious in a lot of the interactions. Always thinking about what you‚Äôre doing and evaluating it and so on.
 You just block and can't say anything.
" I get the feeling that, ""After all, they're only my opinions and my feelings and I doubt if they're right."""
 It sounds a little like it's both ways.  That you feel they don't deserve to be counted, but then also it disturbs you when they're not counted by other people.
 It's risky but you kind of can force yourself to take that risk.
 You'd just sort of vanish unless you put yourself into the situation.
 ‚ÄúI‚Äôm safe now.  I'm easy.  It isn‚Äôt too bad a job.‚Äù It's really frightening to think of making a big shift for maybe it might not, maybe it might not work out.
 That seems to be the, one of the bottom lines of it, people might find out who you are and you‚Äôre not competent; you‚Äôre not up to it.
 So it's really frightening if people would find out what you‚Äôre really like. And that you don't measure up, perhaps you don't measure up.
 Will you be a good enough client, huh?  Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
 Can you say more about that sadness?  I'm not quite clear what it is that feels sad.
 For a moment there it just seemed sad.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  It really is sad to think that you're fearful of being who you are and what you are.
" Just entertaining that thought that, ""Even if I failed, would that be so awful? Would it be terrible?"""
 ‚ÄúSo what?‚Äù
 Always judging, judging, judging and never giving yourself very high marks.
 So that in your own eyes you're really most of the time not too much of a person. A person of many flaws, many....
 Somehow you are...?
 Somehow you are a person.
 Sometimes you can really see yourself positively, ‚ÄúI am a person. I‚Äôm somebody.‚Äù
 But somehow you've been able to trust yourself a little more in, these last minutes.
 So one thing you wanted to have happen was to experience more trusting of yourself and not being quite so harsh on yourself.
 If you can stop always looking over your own shoulder or something and just be spontaneous and real, why, it seems that works pretty well.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  Always sort of two people present: one person doing something; the other judging how well you're doing it.  Or how poorly, usually. 
 'Cause you don't want...
 Hurt the other person. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.   Feeling responsible for their feelings.
 When you re in conflict, though, it‚Äôs hard to know where it will go and that‚Äôs an uneasy feeling for you, I guess.
 So it‚Äôs uh, ‚ÄúSuppose I lost, then how would I look?  How would I look to myself; how would I look to others?‚Äù A defeated person. Hmmm?
 Something about being with another man that makes it even more uneasy as to how is this gonna come out. ‚ÄúWhat's gonna happen next?‚Äù
 You're fearful about that.
 Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.   So any, any contact with another man is sort of a competition in which, ‚ÄúDamn it, you'd better win. You don't want to be on the losing end.‚Äù
 Hmm?
 That there‚Äôs a good reason for not entering open competition like in sports because you're afraid you'll lose.  You don‚Äôt want to lose.  And yet, if I gathered, that's really not in accord with what you think and believe.
 Uhm, hmm.  And that might even apply to you, that even if you lost, you might, still be a person, hmmm?
 I'm sorry?
 Ah hah. Ah hah. If you changed your career, maybe everything would just fall apart.
 It‚Äôs like a safe nest, and you don't know what might happen if you left that.
 You feel you go through the motions of making a change; out they aren't rea1 steps toward- toward change.
 So in spite of all the critical things you say about yourself, you do take positive steps.
 Like a leap?
 Sort of as though almost without thinking about it you‚Äôll, you‚Äôll jump.
 Being here
 This was that kind of a leap.
 Do it. Uhm, hmm. But you realize that you could very easily have gone through the whole judging process and talked yourself out of it.  But instead you took the step.
 Uhm, hmm. Ok. You pretend and pretend and pretend to take steps and you ta1k about it and so on. It‚Äôs about time to just take a step.
 Don‚Äôt miss another opportunity,  like you do in the past.
 Uhm, hmm. You may be painting the picture a little too darkly but still, you do let a lot of things go by without really moving. We're going to have to stop in a couple of minutes. I can't quite believe it, but...
 Quarter after.
 No, no, a half an hour.  I'm sorry. I should have said in advance that it would be a half hour.
 Uhm, hmm. So am I.
 Sometimes you especially feel...
 I didn't quite, I didn't hear well enough to quite get that. Say that again.
 I see. I see. I see, scared of somebody that you feel is superior. Uhm, hmm.
 Uhm, hmm. You won't be good enough. But you didn't feel that way.
 Good. Good. OK. Well shall we, OK to call it quits?
  That at least is one part of it, that you feel...
  ‚Äú...and it‚Äôs just beyond me to know what of these feelings is just based on what‚Äôs in my head and what‚Äôs based on the objective facts about the job‚Äù, for example.
  Is this what you‚Äôre saying - that, that when the job does go - badly then, um, that makes you feel persecuted and all the other schizy things?
  So, I, I guess the impression I get is that you feel kind of a helpless rage, and yet you also feel a lot of positive feeling there too. I mean...  ‚Äúdamn him for being so arbitrary‚Äù.
  And if I get the feeling that you‚Äôre expressing there, it‚Äôs something like this, ‚ÄúNow look, I‚Äôve got a side to it too.  There is- I see this thing from my point of view.‚Äù  Isn‚Äôt that what you‚Äôre saying?
  But you feel,  ‚ÄúFrom my husband I will only get rewarded for being weak‚Äù, or something...
  Yeah, I guess that is better, yeah.  And what you want is a relationship with someone that will strengthen you to fight what‚Äôs in your mind.
  Uhm, hm.  Uhm, hm.
  I can certainly understand your, what, what you‚Äôre saying.  What you want is to find some way of coming out of this hole of, of really resolving a relationship, not just having it chopped off.    And I think in the last part you‚Äôre saying ‚ÄúAnd that doesn‚Äôt seem unreasonable to me.‚Äù
  You feel, as though, staying in the job situation may really bring a blow up on your part.  And it sounds like you‚Äôre saying you feel helpless to know what‚Äôs the best thing to do, or how to deal with that issue...
  I‚Äôd like to understand that hook in your head better. That‚Äôs where you feel...that you‚Äôre just  is that what, is that what the hook means?
  Well, um, one thing we can talk about at the end of the hour I, I feel that we ought to be able to find some way of continuing our agreement.
  Yeah, perhaps.   Well, we can talk about it. At any rate, your feeling is that if uh,  if you could continue to work with me that somehow your attitude would be changed.
  Just furious. And you feel that a part of the basis is that the sexual feelings that you had toward your mixed-up Dr. and B____, uh... just never got sorted out. And part of them are still with the Doctor.
  Uh, huh.
  So, sort of intellectually, you feel, ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs no point to his working with me,‚Äù but...
  ...feelings going on
  What, what I hear you saying there is that you‚Äôre saying, ‚ÄúI just protest at this business of being wrapped up in a situation where I‚Äôm not fitted and where really I am better than that.‚Äù
 ‚ÄúI‚Äôm a person with more capacity and more sensitivity, than, than is used in the situation in which I am.‚Äù
  But that‚Äôs sort of the, other side of the picture, that you‚Äôre...
  There are advantages.  Uhm, hm.
  So, part of your yelling is yelling against a part of youself.
    A part of yourself that‚Äôs oppressing yourself.
  So, so that even there where really he isn‚Äôt oppressive at all, yet you see him and feel him as, as being oppressive. Uhm,hm, uhm,hm.
  So that, your, your mind tells you, ‚ÄúI‚Äôm, I‚Äôm a sophisticated looking person,‚Äù but your feelings say, ‚ÄúOh, you‚Äôre...unattractive.‚Äù 
  I don‚Äôt know, but I guess that‚Äôs a question you‚Äôre really wondering. ‚ÄúCould it be because I went back to him or felt that relationship again?‚Äù
  Yeah, sounds like you‚Äôre saying, ‚ÄúYes, I‚Äôve had these bizarre feelings of feeling my husband and she are against me and so on.  But I‚Äôve tried to take both those into account and the real facts in the situation and to really deal with things. I really tried to take all the elements into account in talking with her and in, in dealing with that problem.‚Äù
     I see. Is this what you mean, that if you get angry at her, feel as much upset and so on, then you‚Äôre fearful that,   ‚ÄúOh my, here will come the whole irrational business again. Uhm,hm.
   I expect one could give them that name but I‚Äôm more interested in the feeling and the meaning that they have for you.
  Uh,huh. I expect so.
  Uh,huh. Uh,huh. You sure would like to get along without a hook in your head.
  So that you feel that way back there you sort of foresaw the possibility of, of being ‚Äúhooked.‚Äù
  I really don‚Äôt know. But at least there‚Äôs one link that you sense of, of, that was one time when you felt that your internal sexual organs or female organs were being hooked, and manipulated.
  I don‚Äôt think I get that. So that the feeling was, ‚ÄúI‚Äôm discouraged - about various things. What I really feel like doing is just, sinking into apathy.‚Äù And you feel maybe that‚Äôs when you put the hook in yourself. That the hook really, in one sense, stands for...I don‚Äôt know, for making yourself be organized, something like that. Uhm,hm.
  Uhm,hm.  I see.  So that he, he sort of supplies the pleasantness of being organized cause he‚Äôs right there in your mind to turn to, is that?  Uhm,hm.
  And so then the hook doesn‚Äôt seem bad, right then.
  You, you don't mean - it‚Äôs that realization that caused you to be effective and unfearful?  No.
  But you just mean, you were quite free of fear that day but the thing that really troubles you is, is the feeling that he‚Äôs lost faith or has given up or is discouraged with you.
  Yes in the waiting room.   So, both literally and in your own mind it isn‚Äôt quite the Center.
  Uh, huh.  And, and it does feel to you as though I‚Äôm partly him and partly not.
  Uh,huh. Uh,huh. Uh,huh. I don‚Äôt know, that, would, would this be catching that, that... you wish somebody could put an effective hook in your head. Uh, huh.  That would seem, now here I‚Äôm wondering, I guess, that would seem so much easier than...dealing with the confusion in yourself.
  Just feel very helpless and incapable tonight.
  That in some real sense with him, at least in the past, you‚Äôre just a tiny child and he‚Äôs leading you around? ... Or, at any rate, , you‚Äôre at his feet.   But when you went there the other day that really wasn‚Äôt the case then. 
     You mean, the way you will be sure that you‚Äôve pushed beyond your own limits...
  Is if you get disorganized.
     Uhm, hm, uhm, hm.  I guess that feeling is  ‚ÄúI really am just a confused little child.  I do need protection.‚Äù
   Uhm, hmm,  ‚ÄúAnd I‚Äôm really not capable and I do need to be protected, and I do need to be told that I can‚Äôt go back to work‚Äù.
    Feel as though there‚Äôs something, well, I‚Äôm not quite sure what you do mean by that.  Whether it is that you mean...whatever can be said that will help must come from outside, or, I‚Äôm not quite sure, but, but, I do get something of the real plea in that...
      Uh, huh.  It would seem so much more effective if I said those things rather than you saying them.
   Uh, huh.  You only stumble around and wonder about them.
     When you came in you felt ‚ÄúI‚Äôm just surly and I‚Äôm not going to talk.‚Äù
  Uhm, hmm.  But you feel, ‚ÄúI, I settle for these little picayune things, when what I want is to be myself and be thinking and ...‚Äù
  But there is just that pleading feeling in you,  ‚ÄúMama, somebody, help me, do things for me, take care of me.‚Äù  And you feel that the only substitute you have for that is, is the hook in your head.
    I‚Äôd like very much to understand that and I‚Äôm afraid I...don‚Äôt quite...
  So it really...
  It sounds like you‚Äôre saying ‚ÄúI really tried to express myself.  I tried to be as much of a person as I was able to.‚Äù  And yet, there‚Äôs something about that that you feel was terrible too, if I understood you right?
 What are you saying, that you don‚Äôt like the fact that you express yourself so vigorously?
   Hm, uhm, hm.  That what you‚Äôre expressing is some kind of a protest.
   Uhm, hmm, uhm, hm, uhm, hm, uhm, hm.  That somehow that, that feeling of againstness just, just gets hold of you so, that, really then the person you‚Äôre talking to just becomes kind of a blur.
  Uhm,hm, uhm,hm, that‚Äôs what I thought, uhm,hm.  The feeling is just so powerful that really, it, it interferes with your vision.  Uhm,hm.    Just some overwhelming feeling of against or protest.
       Well, I guess I can‚Äôt help but say that...it seems to me you are showing so many signs of strength that...I can‚Äôt feel it‚Äôs even a bad day.   But I guess you do.
    So, I guess you‚Äôre saying ‚ÄúWell, if there‚Äôs strength, it‚Äôs just all flailing around strength.
  It certainly doesn‚Äôt seem that way to you.    Well, I see our time is up .......
  Now here...are two things I want to say.  One is, that, um...well, that, that, I, I did say lately that I‚Äôd see you ten times and I really mean it.  And if, um, unless you would choose not to  and that‚Äôd be alright too.  Um, so, that I think - you don‚Äôt work Saturdays, do you?
  Well, I think probably we could work out an, an arrangement on that.
  Yes, you‚Äôre right, this is the 7th.
 Then, then there‚Äôs one other thing that came up today and I, and you came into my mind and I‚Äôd like to ask you about it and you can answer whatever you wish.  There‚Äôs, um, on, on, Saturday and also on Monday and Tuesday, a group of advanced graduate students who are training as counselors, are, are meeting and a number of times in the past, I have held interviews in front of a group like that, simply because, that, uh, they‚Äôre interested in knowing how they can be of help to people and it gives them much more real feeling of what goes on in a relationship to really, um see one, feel one, experience one.  And, I don‚Äôt know...I guess I would just ask and I would be perfectly willing to accept any answer from you.  Would ask, would you be willing to come in Saturday?  If you were, I couldn‚Äôt, in many ways it would be a great advantage to them, and I would feel obligated to you on that score.  The only way I could pay it off in anyway would be to say we certainly wouldn‚Äôt count that in the ten.
  Yes.  Now the way, the way I‚Äôve set it up in the past is that, um, if, if this was the room, for instance, they would be off, here, let‚Äôs say, so that as far as I‚Äôm concerned, it would just be an interview between you and me, but there would be other people there.  But they wouldn‚Äôt be fixed so that you would, but, you could see them if you looked, but, I mean, you wouldn‚Äôt have to.
    We could arrange it most any time Saturday afternoon, although early Saturday afternoon would be best as far as I‚Äôm concerned.
   You couldn‚Äôt do it this Saturday.
  This Saturday was the one.
   Well, don‚Äôt, don‚Äôt be sorry.  I‚Äôm, oh, I‚Äôm sorry too, but uh, I guess I feel ah...
    Sure, sure.  Well...alright, that might be possible for the following Saturday.  Uhm ...let‚Äôs make, ah...
     I don‚Äôt think you would, but if you did you could say so or we could leave or whatever.  I mean, ah, there would be no compulsion in any of this.  My experience has been that, that, ah, ah...because I‚Äôve wondered the same about myself, ‚ÄúWill I be afraid and not able to really function the way I would like to?‚Äù  My experience has been, that once we start, it seems just like any other time.  But if it didn‚Äôt for you...Well, you can say so if you felt uneasy.  We wouldn‚Äôt have to carry it on.  But, I would just say on the basis of the experience I‚Äôve had, I don‚Äôt think that would be true.
  Well that‚Äôs, that‚Äôs, let‚Äôs see, you can‚Äôt come in this Saturday and you can‚Äôt come in next Tuesday evening.  So, um, then how would it be if we make... Oh...
  That Saturday I‚Äôm down in Champaign.  Uh, nuts.  Um...what about um, next Wednesday evening at 7 or 7:30?
 Well, what I was going to say is I don‚Äôt know whether the group could do it then, but let‚Äôs us make an appointment for that time and if ah, and so it would mean you would have to come without knowing for sure whether it would just be the two of us  or whether it would be in front of a group.  And maybe that‚Äôs just as well.
  No, not unless you wish them to, but really they would just be sympathetic observers.  That‚Äôs really what they would be.
  Sure.
  OK?
  Alright.  Let‚Äôs make it 7:30 Wednesday evening.  That‚Äôs October 3rd, is that  okay as far as you know?  Would you like a note on that, cause that‚Äôs an irregular time.
      Here, I‚Äôll just...help you, reminder for you anyway...
  I think so, the way I feel, the way I see you, yes.
  OK.  One last thought occurs to me and this will sound like something I thought of before, but I haven‚Äôt.  I thought of it only because you said you couldn‚Äôt come in on Saturday.  Um...would you be willing for them to, to listen to this recording which would then kind of prepare them for...you.  I mean, or, or, or not and again whatever you say is OK by me, because that‚Äôs just a hunch of this moment.
  They‚Äôd sort of feel, that just occurred to me, that they‚Äôd, might sort of, that they‚Äôd feel that they would know you a little.
     Well, I wouldn‚Äôt want to in any way push you.
 But my question is...
  ‚ÄúKnow me a little.‚Äù
  Is it alright with you?
 Well, I‚Äôd just like to see if I‚Äôm getting this.  That is, you‚Ä¶ I get the feeling that for quite a time, you felt‚Ä¶ very much controlled by grandmother‚Äôs physical needs. And that then out of that situation, and out of the situation surrounding the divorce and so on, and the placement of Carol, that you feel she‚Äôs begun to‚Ä¶ she has more than begun‚Ä¶ she has quite fully developed a lot of highly fighting sort of attitudes.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 It‚Äôs not too hard for you to understand how Carol might feel in that‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ same situation.
 Neither of you could actually do it, but the feeling of wanting to‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ push her, or do something to her.
 You just sort of feel she‚Äôs developed what is usually a more adult pattern just because‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ it‚Äôs her only way of‚Ä¶  getting at her grandmother.
 M-hm.  It would seem too bad that  continues but what concerns you is, if she feels that‚Ä¶ she‚Äôs gotten the raw of every deal, what that will do to her as time goes on.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 M-hm.  You think it may sound a little bitter to describe those conditions in her, but actually that‚Äôs the way it is.  You do feel a little bitter about the‚Ä¶
 Feel that you don‚Äôt quite fit into her picture of queen and subject, and  that‚Äôs ‚Ä¶
 You want very much that Carol shouldn‚Äôt feel that‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶ way about you.  M-hm.
 You‚Äôre afraid that this good record in summer school may be no more permanent than it was last year.
 Feel as though it takes every bit of your‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ strength that you can possibly bring to bear to get her to do anything of that sort.
 M-hm. M-hm.
 Is this it?  That you feel right in the middle between the two to a point where you can‚Äôt possibly be genuine‚Ä¶
 M-hm.  If I get it, you feel that that attitude on her part is something that somehow you don‚Äôt quite like, but you feel as though you can understand it.  That there she‚Äôs got some outlet that doesn‚Äôt criticize her and so on.
 Feel that she‚Äôs just walled in on every side.
  M-hm.  M-hm.
 M-hm. M-hm.  You feel she can always do enough, say enough along that line to just make you question your own‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ behavior a little.
 ‚ÄúShould I really have done this?‚Äù
 You can tell yourself that‚Ä¶ well, these things she says and so on aren‚Äôt so serious, but still they do hit you in your own feelings, and have kept you from‚Ä¶ kept you from marriage, kept you from a lot of things.
 Still you feel that‚Ä¶ somehow you‚Äôve got to come to some kind of choice in regard to this if it isn‚Äôt too late.
 So that any thought of leaving her just makes you feel, ‚ÄúBut no one would really care for my mother‚Ä¶‚Äù I mean that‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ it just seems impossible that way.
 So you just‚Ä¶
 M-hm. M-hm.  That you don‚Äôt feel too sure‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ in a lot of these things but at least at the moment it seems as though this clinging type of effort on her part no longer seems to make you feel sorry.  Instead it makes you feel more and more‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶ resentful.
 M-hm.  Seems to have‚Ä¶ since you were seventeen the full burden has been on you‚Ä¶
 Even before that.  M-hm.
 Even longer than that.  You‚Äôve just felt that you had to be the one to carry the burden‚Ä¶
 M-hm.
 Feel that instead of the reaction that‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ you have had all along, she has‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶ just the‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ reverse.
 A little disturbing to find her so resentful of illness, and even your illness.
 M-hm. M-hm.
 It may be a little disturbing to think that she has daydreams like that, but certainly your mother‚Äôs methods don‚Äôt supply any answer.
 Seems as though all of the things that you really value, I mean, the personality side of it, she just doesn‚Äôt measure up.
 Sounds as though you feel pretty sure that that‚Äôs one procedure that just would not work with her.  She would battle to the death rather than‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ accept punishment.
 Seems that it goes a long ways back in her that she just will not give in to someone else‚Äôs‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ will.
 Looks as though she was stubborn even about coming into the world.
 So you can‚Äôt help but be a little concerned that a fever that early and that prolonged‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ might have done some sort of‚Ä¶
 That‚Äôs one of the things you would like to check on.
 Feel as though she just never gives up really in the intent to have it her way.
 That is, you wish you could see it her way or the way it seems to her and this is at least one possibility, that maybe having been wrong so much in the eyes of other people, she‚Äôs determined that she will be‚Ä¶ that this is right, what she wants.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 M-hm.  Feel as though somehow it‚Äôs sort of necessary to her to build herself up‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶ or to justify herself somehow.
 One quality you really respect in her because you feel you haven‚Äôt been able to live up to it yourself, actually.
 If I get the feeling there, as you look at her and compare her with‚Ä¶ your sisters‚Äô children and so on‚Ä¶ you don‚Äôt feel hopeless about her, and you feel these are perhaps just stages any child would have to live through.  But in her case, those stages are made so much more difficult by your mother's attitude.
 Makes you feel badly to think that you really have to protect your child to have a little‚Ä¶ foolish amusement.
  It makes you feel as though‚Ä¶ you are a mouse in your relationship to your mother and‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ yes‚Ä¶
 Simple enough to say that, but to see how in the world it could be otherwise‚Ä¶ that‚Äôs really perplexing.
  Just seems as though leaving her wouldn‚Äôt be the answer for you or for her.
 You can‚Äôt help but feel that that would be a big help in the solution of the difficulty.
  Just isn‚Äôt easy for any of you and you do wonder whether the three generations can possibly live together comfortably, all things considered.
 I see that our time‚Äôs up for today.  I think Miss North has talked with you about possibly coming in twice a week.  Would you like to do that?
 Well‚Ä¶certainly would leave it up to you.  Would you like to come in at 1:30 on Friday?
 See you at that time.
 Well, do you know where you want to begin this morning?  Or whether you would like to begin?
 You have been trying to kind of sort out and figure out what are those reasons.  I mean, is it‚Ä¶
 Seriously damaged.
 That is, you feel at a loss as to how to handle it, but you think that perhaps one of the basic troubles is anyway is that your mother feels decidedly deprived of some of the authority and position that she had or that she feels she should have.
 Is this what you‚Äôre saying? You acted pretty spontaneously, almost explosively maybe and gave Carol a whipping, which‚Ä¶ but as you look at the results of that you are sort of fearful that the only real result of that was that it gave an opening for your mother in quite a sneaky fashion to try to take Carol away from you.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 I get two feelings there.  That you‚Äôre saying on the one hand, ‚ÄúI have to be and I want to be Carol‚Äôs mother with the responsibilities.‚Äù That that means, both for praise and punishment and so on.  And the other feeling I get is that‚Ä¶ you feel that it‚Äôs practically impossible to function in that way because of this three-cornered playing off of one person against another on Carol‚Äôs part, your mother‚Äôs part and your part, too.
 M-hm.  That is, you‚Ä¶
 M-hm. At any rate, as you try to understand the why of your mother‚Äôs behavior, it could well be that‚Ä¶ as little by little, all of her responsibilities have faded away.  Now she focuses on the one chick who is growing up, but perhaps she can‚Äôt accept it.  But that even understanding it that way, leaves you still very much up against it as to what the hell to do.
 In other words, you can understand that she might feel pretty useless and out of it, but still it seems to you that‚Ä¶ she should somehow have been prepared for that.  That everyone ought to know that that kind of period is bound to come.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 Seems as though anybody should be that planful, should be thinking ahead to that degree.
 Really feel as though‚Ä¶ that is, quite a true description of your situation that actually you‚Äôre dealing with‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ two children, and your mother is the youngest by several degrees.
 M-hm.  It isn‚Äôt childishness of old age.  But‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ you feel it‚Äôs more a basic immaturity that she never has grown up.
 M-hm.  In other words, you just feel very much like asking the world, ‚ÄúWhat shall I do?‚Äù  And yet you‚Äôve gotten so many answers.
 All the same answer.  But still it is not the answer for you.
 That if you were somebody else, why, maybe you could be this hardboiled person who would look at it in that way, but somehow in your own feelings, that isn‚Äôt you, and you just can‚Äôt handle it in the way that somebody else thinks would be fine.
 M-hm.  That is, if you were the only one involved, you feel as though, well, you could kind of submerge yourself and build her up and so on‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ and get along on that kind of an appeasement basis.
 But with Carol there that doesn‚Äôt seem so possible.  And then the other feeling that you seem to be expressing is that, it is kind of a shock to think that you may be giving up this man simply because you can‚Äôt find a real solution to the whole problem at home.  Is that‚Ä¶?
  M-hm. M-hm.
 M-hm.  So that‚Ä¶ you explore various alleys and they all look as though they had stone walls at the end of them.
 Maybe you could place Carol, and you feel sure that would do her no good.  It didn‚Äôt before and you don‚Äôt think it would this time.  Or you could walk out on your mother, and that might be perfectly lovely from somebody else‚Äôs point of view and would just be hell for you.
 Or you could try to go on as at present and that seems equally undesirable.
 It may sound mean on your part, but it seems to you that she really exaggerates Carol‚Äôs faults so as to build up herself in that, now, ‚Äúif I had Carol‚Äôs  it wouldn‚Äôt have been true.‚Äù
 So that for a time you thought that you had the breakfast issue at least, partly‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ handled, only to be defeated by your mother‚Äôs need to feel useful and her need to feel that, ‚ÄúNow you do thus and so.‚Äù
   M-hm. M-hm.
 You beat up on the painting, where Carol beats up on‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ children.
 M-hm. M-hm.  But you realize that‚Ä¶ some of the‚Ä¶ that the responsibility for that choice‚Ä¶ for some of the choices to be made is yours.  There just isn‚Äôt any way of getting away from it, even though you look somewhat disappointedly, but yet the fact that‚Ä¶ yeah, you make all those choices now, but they melt as rapidly as they‚Äôre made.
 I‚Äôm not quite sure I get it.  Let me see if I do.  That‚Ä¶ one possible way of feeling about it is that maybe you regard yourself as having too much‚Ä¶ place in it.  Maybe you look upon yourself as being too important.
 And when you get those‚Ä¶ when you get those ideas‚Ä¶ and here‚Äôs where I‚Äôm not quite clear: then that makes you feel more indecisive and lacking in confidence and so on?
 M-hm.  M-hm. Oh, yes.  I see.  ‚ÄòCause that would sort of undermine any of the thinking you had done that maybe it doesn‚Äôt amount to anything; you‚Äôre just looking at yourself as‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶ more important than you really are.
 That you‚Äôre just seeing problems where none exist, and so on‚Ä¶ now‚Ä¶ where, at least‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ where they aren‚Äôt as large as you‚Ä¶
 M-hm.  That you feel very uncertain really as to how to feel about the darn thing.  I mean‚Ä¶
 Maybe you take it too much within yourself, maybe you see it in too magnified terms; maybe not; maybe both things.
 M-hm.  M-hm.  It just isn‚Äôt feasible to try every possible course of action, but you realize that if you could come to an assurance in yourself that this is really the best thing to do, then you know you could go through with it, if you felt sure within yourself.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 How do we get any sense of assurance inside?
 That both back in your childhood and in, at the present time, in your relationship with your mother, there are all kinds of things to make you feel less sure of yourself. I mean, that something that to you seems fine or good or a‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ nice idea, is all of a sudden no good, and‚Ä¶
 That all kinds of things have happened to make you feel, ‚ÄúGosh, I don‚Äôt really know what‚Äôs what. I mean, my judgement isn‚Äôt any good‚Äù and so on.
 And you don‚Äôt like the effect that that has on Carol any more than you like it in yourself.  I mean, that it doesn‚Äôt give her a feeling toward you of the sort that you‚Äôd like.
  M-hm.  M-hm.
 So that somehow below this level of feeling, ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know anything,‚Äù is some kind of deeper feeling, ‚ÄúBut I really am right.‚Äù
 ‚ÄúAnd why shouldn‚Äôt I have a chance to‚Ä¶‚Äù
 ‚Äú‚Ä¶learn what‚Äôs right in my own way, even if sometimes I‚Äôm wrong.‚Äù  Is that‚Ä¶?
 Sort of contradictory.
 Feel that in a sense that each of you have to try to preserve yourself.  She‚Äôs trying to say, even when you‚Äôre right, ‚ÄúWell, you‚Äôre wrong‚Äù because that builds her up.
 And you know that you sometimes react in, perhaps, somewhat the same way, though not quite to that‚Ä¶ extreme.
  Feel that in the last year or more, you have made some attempt to really‚Ä¶ what?  To be yourself, even against her.  But you‚Äôre afraid that‚Äôs made things worse than ever.
 So that you feel that this‚Ä¶ trying to stand against her has really made.
 ‚Ä¶ the whole business such a battle ground that every little thing is‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ extremely important.
 A big issue.
 Attempts‚Ä¶ her part and then your part, trying to have control of the situation until you just feel, ‚ÄúWhy the hell don‚Äôt you get out.‚Äù
 Don‚Äôt feel very proud of that, but that is the way you feel.
 M-hm.  Feel that if you could sort of appease your mother without its having an effect on Carol, that would be‚Ä¶ lovely.
 That is, you can understand enough of how your mother must feel that‚Ä¶ you really wouldn‚Äôt have any objection, as far as you‚Äôre concerned, to doing a number of things that would submerge your own interests for her.  But‚Ä¶ when you think of the effect on Carol, that‚Äôs a horse of a different color.
  With just the two of you, you got along comfortably because you were quite willing to submerge yourself.
 M-hm.  But when Carol came into the picture‚Ä¶
 Cuts very deep.
 That you kind of like to hope that‚Ä¶ things would be so much better if she really had some understanding of your mother.  But‚Ä¶
 M-hm.  M-hm.  It seems to you as though you have no right whatsoever to be happy that she‚Äôs away.
 Makes you feel as though, ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs very bad and very reprehensible that I should feel pleased and to be having such a good time just because she‚Äôs gone.‚Äù
 Just feel sure that you‚Äôll feel very guilty about the things you‚Äôve done and the kind of relationship that you had with her.
 So that for a long time you fell really that you had caused this death, and that you were blamed, not only by yourself, but by your family‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ and‚Ä¶ that that has made it‚Ä¶
 I see.
 In connection with his death, you were kind of given the feeling that, ‚ÄúWell, you were the one that‚Ä¶ ‚Äú
 ‚Äú‚Ä¶ should have died instead of him.‚Äù
 M-hm.  In a way, you can understand it, but still‚Ä¶ not quite.
 It‚Äôs all of these things that made it just that much tougher for you to gain any of this assurance within yourself‚Ä¶ that you don‚Äôt‚Ä¶
 M-hm.  M-hm.  It‚Äôs that feeling that, ‚ÄúMy golly, I might again be responsible for somebody‚Äôs death.‚Äù
 There was another situation in which you felt terrible guilty‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ about death and‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶somehow sort of a feeling as though‚Ä¶
 M-hm.  Least it‚Äôs for reasons like that that walking out on her just has a very different meaning for you than‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ for anyone else.
 I‚Äôm afraid we‚Äôre going to have to stop this morning.  Would you like to come in again Friday at 1:30?  Would that be feasible?  Or next week at this same time, whichever you want?
  Don‚Äôt have to.
 M-hm. All right. Or‚Ä¶ here‚Äôs one other thought.  It could be‚Ä¶ if it‚Äôs the 1:30 hour that‚Äôs difficult‚Ä¶
 Would eleven o‚Äôclock Friday suit you better?
 Would you be able to come at that time?
 Well, that would be all right.
  I see. All right. Well, then, let‚Äôs make it eleven o‚Äôclock on Friday.
 Well, how goes the battle?
 That does sound like a discovery.  Let me see if I really get it.  That‚Ä¶ as you‚Äôve thought it over, you feel as though really when you come right down to it, you‚Äôre the most responsible or potentially the most responsible individual of the trio.
 And that‚Ä¶ as I get this that maybe you can‚Ä¶ maybe you can be responsible for the attitudes you have rather than looking to them to‚Ä¶ just reacting to what they do, that you can look within yourself and‚Ä¶ take a stand in terms of the way you feel, or do things without them‚Ä¶ without being quite such a tennis ball for their feelings. Does that‚Ä¶ that catch it at all?
 What are you saying there?  That, in other words, you never can get away from the fact that your resentments do enter in to the situation‚Ä¶
 It just is one of the facts in the situation.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 ‚ÄúAnd let‚Äôs deal with it as a fact.‚Äù
 M-hm.  That is, you sort of felt that somehow you could, you could dodge that or you could avoid it‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ and now you‚Äôre saying, ‚ÄúAll right.  I have those feelings. I‚Äôll try to accept them and set in terms of them.‚Äù  Is that‚Ä¶ quite sure of the last part.
 M-hm.  It just doesn‚Äôt seem quite so‚Ä¶ quite so awful to accept it as an aspect of yourself, is that‚Ä¶?
 Sounds as though lots of things have gone on in you.  And if I get part of this last, it is, ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt have to feel a certain way toward her.‚Äù
 ‚ÄúI can just feel as I feel toward her.‚Äù  I mean that ‚ÄúI can‚Ä¶‚Äù
 ‚Äú‚Ä¶ and‚Ä¶ and then I won‚Äôt have to feel so tense and so on guard and‚Ä¶‚Äù
 M-hm.  M-hm.  Feel as though by acting as you feel you should act rather than in terms of your instincts or your natural way of reacting, you‚Äôve sort of built up in her a certain expectation that you will‚Ä¶ run to her as it were, and you don‚Äôt‚Ä¶
 You can see that a lot of the things you‚Äôve done have been because you have felt so guilty and yet as you look at that, she‚Äôs really the one that had made you feel guilty.
 That is, you feel that you can realize that there are realistic things that may happen. She may have a heart attack‚Ä¶ or serious things may happen.
 But that‚Ä¶ feel as though perhaps now you could look at that as something that happened, not something that you were personally responsible for.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 Feel that in that sense you really have been‚Ä¶ seeing yourself as more important than you are, I mean, as responsible.
 ‚Ä¶ for lots of things that‚Ä¶
 Is this sort of it?  That you‚Äôve been thinking for a long time that‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúWell, I don‚Äôt really have to have the strength to make these decisions because‚Ä¶ when we‚Äôre married then that‚Äôll take care of itself‚Äù and so on.
 Now it has sort of hit home, ‚ÄúI am the one who‚Äôs somehow got to make these decisions and meet the situation.‚Äù
 Feel that part of this whole experience is facing life as something that has disagreeable and ugly aspects to it as well as nice colored ones.
 M-hm.  And you feel as though the way that you‚Äôve been dishonest with yourself is not in your listing of the debit side: that‚Äôs been very complete.  But it‚Äôs that you haven‚Äôt been willing to face and admit the fact that you have lots of good qualities.
 Shouldn‚Äôt give yourself any credit for those.
 Just haven‚Äôt made out that list yet.  
 You can see yourself as having brought about some aspects of the situation but it doesn‚Äôt make you feel guilty: it‚Äôs just that that‚Äôs the way it has been and now you see ways of handling it somewhat differently.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 M-hm.  They‚Äôre not new.  And you‚Äôve had them in the back of your mind before, but there is something about the assurance you feel in regard to them that sounds a little different.
 M-hm.  You can just‚Ä¶ somehow for the first time feel comfortable about doing something that you want to do, and making suitable arrangements for her.  But that, that‚Äôs that.
 Might be all very temporary; might not even last over the weekend.
 There just isn‚Äôt so much fear and guilt in the whole way you approach your mother and Carol and the whole situation.
 Just ashamed of yourself, hm?
 Uhm,hmm.  That is, really as you think it over, it changes your notion of God as well as changing your own feeling of‚Ä¶
 It‚Äôs so new and so kind of striking that you don‚Äôt really know whether you can believe in it or not, but‚Ä¶ but you do feel as thought something has happened inside of you.
 Just seems as though it has‚Ä¶ there‚Äôs been something different about getting it out here then in the kind of partial thing you can do in talking to a friend or something like that.  Seems as though a lot of it has really been kept inside.
 Just isn‚Äôt good form and it doesn‚Äôt help.
 M-hm.  Really was the concern over what was happening to her that made you feel that, by gosh, you had to do something about yourself.
 And you particularly want Carol to feel that she really is somebody, somebody‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ that counts.  And you‚Äôre perfectly willing to try and make your mother feel that way, too, but that‚Äôs a little secondary to‚Ä¶
 M-hm.m.  It‚Äôs kind of a spiral.  I mean, that‚Ä¶ it works.
 That is, think that what you‚Äôre describing is the opposite of a vicious one.
 Really is, isn‚Äôt it.
 And are you saying there that that‚Äôs the way you‚Äôd like to leave it too‚Ä¶ to see how it works?
 So that you not only feel‚Ä¶ well, you feel a certain amount of assurance about what you‚Äôre going to do; also, realize it‚Äôs going to be a tough job and you don‚Äôt really know if you can do it, but if you can‚Äôt, you also feel sure about some of the other things you might do, like getting a job.
 Gonna really do it, you hope, you hope.
 And if I really understand your attitude, it is that way.  I mean, you feel, you think you can and yet‚Ä¶ there‚Äôs a little uncertainty about it.  I mean, you don‚Äôt feel a hundred percent sure that‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ it will work.  It‚Äôs just that you do feel enough differently to give yourself some hope in the situation.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 M-hm.  M-hm.
 One‚Äôs going to do it.
 That you know you‚Äôre going to be scared to death at times as to whether or not, maybe this time, this is something real with her.
 But you also feel that‚Ä¶well, she has strength enough to stand lots of other kinds of excitement‚Ä¶ that perhaps you can look at this‚Ä¶ a little more in that whole context.  Is that‚Ä¶?
 You don‚Äôt quite like the tentative sort of assurance that you feel now.  You wish and hope that maybe some day it will be more definite that you‚Äôve‚Ä¶
 M-hm.  That‚Äôs it.  When you really you‚Ä¶ you think you see a way of operating in this situation.  But so far, it‚Äôs just thinking you see it.  Then you‚Äôd like awfully well to have some evidence that it really does work that way.
 I get the feeling and I don‚Äôt know that you are saying it, but I get the feeling that‚Ä¶ that you have a sense of the right to have your own feelings.
 You can give yourself enough on the credit side of the ledger to feel that, ‚ÄúI have a right to‚Ä¶‚Äù
 ‚Äú‚Ä¶ try and complete some of these things that I‚Äôve always wanted to do.‚Äù
 ‚ÄúWhy should I always be the goat?‚Äù
 Been self-imposed, hasn‚Äôt it?
 ‚ÄúWhy have I made myself the goat?‚Äù
 Somehow you can see the whole situation rather differently than it looked at the time.
 It‚Äôs possible that maybe you have the right to feel a little more hardboiled.
 Couldn‚Äôt be a woman or the rat.
 At any rate, you‚Äôre sorta deciding that maybe you‚Äôre a woman and whatever else you‚Äôre compared, maybe a mouse or whatever.
 Mrs. Milktoast, it was.
 I have a feeling‚Ä¶
 M-hm. M-hm.  Have a feeling that maybe you can be you as in pretending you‚Äôre Mrs. Milktoast.
 Doesn‚Äôt make much difference as to how this happened.  The important thing is that somehow you do feel differently and see a good many things differently.
 So you can let yourself be guided more by your own feelings. I mean, if‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶ you feel that‚Äôs what she needs then that‚Äôs what you‚Äôll do.
 Is this Carol speaking here?
 Getting a little suspicious of what you‚Äôre learning.  
  Feel that she really senses a difference and that was one way of putting it.
 Feel as though that really is about the end.
 M-hm.  M-hm.
  Not so weighed down‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶ or oppressed or something.
 Well, I think that‚Ä¶ I‚Äôd like to say a couple of things.  That if‚Ä¶ during‚Ä¶ I‚Äôll only be here for the next two weeks, but if during that time, why, you feel as though, ‚ÄúHey, wait a minute, this isn‚Äôt working out‚Äù and so on, okay, come back in and I‚Äôll be glad to see you again.  And‚Ä¶ whether or not you find it necessary to come back in, why, good luck to the ex-Mrs. Milktoast.
 M-hm.  Sure. Sure.
 Any‚Ä¶ Monday, Wednesday or Friday in either week, I‚Äôd be glad to see you.
 Or Friday. I mean, I‚Äôm sure we could work out a time.  Miss North could arrange a time.
 And I think about the only other thing I‚Äôd like to say is that I always feel that‚Ä¶ really very grateful to someone who‚Äôs letting me share a part of their experience‚Ä¶ feel‚Ä¶
  Spill to?
  Okay.
  Well, the immediate agenda is that it‚Äôs kind of scary.
  Mhm. I think that‚Äôs outside, I don‚Äôt know. At any rate, let‚Äôs, let‚Äôs try and disregard that.
  You don‚Äôt quite know whether that‚Äôs the place to start or not, but at least that was helpful to you, I gather.
  You really got some things out.
  It is kind of a tough spot because you don‚Äôt want to produce a problem, if, if there is anything you want to talk about, you want it to be real.
  Mhm. But what you know and what you recall is that in... you felt a deep hunger in you    for that kind of a, of a connected-ness.
  Mhm, that sort of slightly phoney concern in childhood has perhaps intensified your, your hunger to be really close.   Mhm. And perhaps to...perhaps make it too much.
  You didn‚Äôt want her to have anything that was shut off from you.
  The more you wanted a complete openness on her part, the more that made her  pull away and increase the distance.
  So, intellectually, why, it‚Äôs perfectly okay for her to have her privacy, but feeling-wise, you‚Äôre hungry for all of it.
  Mhm, mhm, mhm, mhm, mhm.
  So you‚Äôre concerned that maybe you‚Äôre not living up to expectations.  And, as far as I can get it, it‚Äôs your own expectation that you‚Äôre afraid that you‚Äôre not living up to.
  Uh-huh, people won‚Äôt think well of you unless you really emote.
  Mhm. Mhm. That was the key that unlocked your feelings.   Mhm.
  You sound very...not so anxious, and you‚Äôre not so concerned about expectations, you‚Äôre just feeling, ‚ÄúAll right, , I‚Äôm here.‚Äù   Mhm.
  The thing that‚Äôs not okay is to sit, huh?
  Can you explain that ‚Äúhmm‚Äù?
  All of a sudden you could see what it was like to be me.
  Mhm. In this moment, at any rate.
  You sort of stand off and look at yourself a little bit and, ‚ÄúAm I performing? I don‚Äôt know.‚Äù  Mhm. Mhm.  And part of you is really in you and part of you is really looking at you.
  But at least the question arises, ‚ÄúIf we were alone, would I be talking...would I be doing something different than I‚Äôm doing now?‚Äù
  Hmm. Mhm. Hmmm. It‚Äôs not only your own self-criticism, but you feel there may be critical perceptions from others. 
  You‚Äôre kind of asking yourself, ‚ÄúCan I be a friend to my anxiety, to my concern, to my fear?‚Äù
   Mhm. But the honest part of you is saying, ‚ÄúI really don‚Äôt have an agenda. I don‚Äôt have anything I need to talk about.‚Äù
  At this moment, mhm.
  Mhm. Mhm. But even in advance you‚Äôre being critical of yourself.   
  I see.  Hmm.
  Mhm.  But still, in some respects, I symbolize to you a hostile, critical person.
  Mhm. It sounds real.
  Mhm. You‚Äôre not sure how important it is, but you know that    he and I are in some way mixed up in this situation.
  Mhm. Mhm. What would it be like to just be your own self with him?
  Mhm. Mhm. Mhm. You might be making yourself vulnerable to some very evil things.
  Certainly not a necessity, and yet, uh, you‚Äôre not quite sure.
  Ah, mhm, mhm. ‚ÄúAm I just the wimp he claims I am?‚Äù Huh?
  The wimp or the marshmallow,  the softie.
  Mmm.  That has some really bad connotations for you.
  Mhm, mhm. That makes you question yourself a little bit, and perhaps in particular you‚Äôre wondering, ‚ÄúAm I to any degree pussy-whipped?‚Äù
  So when you meet anger, whether in men or women, you tend to placate it if possible.
  Mhm, mhm, mhm.  But you tended to feel quite rejected, quite...quite a disturbing thing if the sexual aspect was not, uh,  mutual.  Mhm.
  Mhm, mhm. So that if she didn‚Äôt want to make love, it might be that she was angry for you at something else entirely.
  That term really gets to you in some ways, and it‚Äôs   necessary to mull it over.
  Mhm, mhm.  You feel really offended by that term, or by that accusation, perhaps.
  Mhm. It brings out something that‚Äôs difficult to look at. You feel, ‚ÄúYes I have placated women when they‚Äôre angry or sharp or something.‚Äù
  So it isn‚Äôt quite all right to feel, ‚ÄúI‚Äôm male. I‚Äôm masculine. I‚Äôm powerful.‚Äù
  Mhm. And that passion for equality makes it not quite all right to feel  strong   and masculine.  Mhm, mhm. I‚Äôve got to confess something, I completely forgot to ask anyone to keep time. I have no idea whether we‚Äôve gone overtime, or what. Can somebody tell me?
  Let‚Äôs take two or three more minutes, if you want?
  Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.  It seems as though there wasn‚Äôt hardly time enough to say that.
  That‚Äôs sort of a preventive thing to say.
  Okay. Mhm. Mhm. I hear you saying, ‚ÄúI want it known that I‚Äôm a feminist, but I also want to be free to feel myself as a strong man.‚Äù    ‚ÄúI believe in equality, but I also believe in my own strength.‚Äù
  Okay. Okay. Okay. Mhm. So, maybe, it‚Äôs, ‚ÄúI believe in equality and I am strong myself.‚Äù  ‚ÄúI‚Äôm strong and masculine and male.‚Äù
   Uh-huh. So what you‚Äôre saying is ‚ÄúI‚Äôm a strong human being and I want to affirm that in myself and others.‚Äù
  You quickly restrain those outbursts, which seem both pain and also almost like laughter.
  There‚Äôs something very emotional about this moment.    You cut it off very quickly.    You cut it off very quickly.
  Seems those sounds come bursting out from a very deep place.
  And that touched something in you.  Mmm.
  Mhm. It comes bursting out almost unbidden. Mhm.  This seems like a very strange time to stop, but is that okay with you?
  Okay.
 After we‚Äôve sat for a moment maybe you‚Äôll feel willing to tell the group how this seemed to you, and then I‚Äôll say how this seemed to me, and then if you want to we can let them in on the discussion.  
 Okay. Then I‚Äôll talk a little bit and if there‚Äôs anything there you want to add you can. Um‚Ä¶ I guess, for a person with no agenda you seemed  to go quite a ways.  I really, um, appreciate it very much, the fact that you, uh, were not willing to concoct a problem. That you waited long enough until you felt you had some things to say, some experiences that you wanted to reveal and that felt very good to me. I know during, uh, one of the silences, I felt it seemed like pure relationship. And at that point, not much of anything had come out in the way of the content, but I felt very much a relationship between us. And, uh, it felt okay. It felt okay. Whereas, I would have been quite contented had, uh, nothing of significance come up. But then, gradually, you did use the time to get into things that really meant something to you. And I liked the way that you listened to yourself and, and it was only when you felt something that, uh, you were willing to say it. Uh‚Ä¶ I felt, uh, very much at ease with you, with silence, with the situation that perhaps there would be no agenda, uh, I felt very comfortable with that. I wonder if that‚Äôs... Shall we let them ask questions?
  It isn‚Äôt only a question of what your academic plans would be, but quite a little broader than that, what really are you aiming for.
  M-hm.  M-hm.
  If I understand you there, you mean that if the kind of social adjustment you have now is projected just as it is into the future, then it isn‚Äôt going to be what you want.
  So that really this is in the hope of kind of speeding up or improving the process that you‚Äôre already trying to carry on by yourself‚Ä¶
  So that really this is in the hope of kind of speeding up or improving the process that you‚Äôre already trying to carry on by yourself‚Ä¶
  M-hm.  So that for a good long time in your own feelings, and even longer if you can believe the reports of others, you haven‚Äôt had the kind of relationship with friends that you‚Äôd like.
  M-hm.  Then it seems to you they‚Äôre not‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶not satisfactory and not within the range of things that you‚Äôd really like.
 And the lack that you feel is in a meaningful kind of relationship that goes beyond just on-the-job kind of‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶friendship.  M-hm.
  M-hm.  You really sense that as a lack in yourself that you don‚Äôt have the kind of contact you‚Äôd like either with fellows or girls.
  There‚Äôs no question about that.
  You wanted the recognition that this was something special‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶and it really kinda hurt that they took it just the other way and felt you were really‚Ä¶
  M-hm.  You sort of wished you didn‚Äôt have to defend your position to that degree.
  M-hm.  Do I understand there that there‚Äôs really been then a shift in your own goal from wanting to be different to now really wishing you could be much like others.  Is that what‚Äôs implied there? ‚Ä¶But finding that pretty difficult.
  M-hm.  M-hm.  But that‚Ä¶feels to you like something of a discrepancy, of wanting to be different and have your own uniqueness, and still wishing the other thing, too.
 M-hm.  Why do you have to place such a value on it, hm?
  ‚Ä¶that you don‚Äôt like.
  M-hm.  The present you can stand quite comfortably,  but it‚Äôs the thought of the future that‚Ä¶
  ‚Ä¶makes you think twice.
  M-hm.  You‚Äôre really raising the question, aren‚Äôt you, where are you going to live emotionally in the years to come.  Is that‚Ä¶?
  M-hm.  How does one reach the kind of goals that you‚Äôd like to have?
  You feel as though you just haven‚Äôt taken the steps that would lead to friendship, is that‚Ä¶?
  That‚Äôs what you‚Äôd like to change.
 M-hm.  How does one reach the kind of goals that you‚Äôd like to have?
  You feel as though you just haven‚Äôt taken the steps that would lead to friendship, is that‚Ä¶?
  That‚Äôs what you‚Äôd like to change.
  That here you‚Äôre going to have a chance to do something of a different sort and‚Ä¶will you do it?  And how should it be done?  And so on.  It‚Äôs that kind of thing that‚Ä¶
  In other words, if you‚Äôre really sure within yourself of‚Ä¶why you are the way you are, and what you want, then the rest wouldn‚Äôt really trouble you.
  M-hm.  The real problem lies in the uncertainty within yourself.
  And if you could deal with that, you‚Äôd feel quite comfortable about dealing with the tactics and strategy that the purpose might demand.
  Guess our time‚Äôs about up for today.  In regard to another interview, suppose I phone you.
  And then we can arrange that .
  Okay.
 Well, I‚Äôm eager to know what‚Äôs what with you.
 Oh, right now, whatever your concerns are in your present life.   I guess that‚Äôs what I‚Äôm interested in.
 Oh, right now, whatever your concerns are in your present life.   I guess that‚Äôs what I‚Äôm interested in.
  Uh-huh. Then that‚Äôs what I‚Äôd like you to discuss.
 Are you afraid of the responsibility or, or what aspect of it is most frightening?
 Will you really be able to be a mother to them when they,  when you come home from work. Hmmm?
  And you haven‚Äôt really had a chance to explore it in, in depth; you‚Äôve talked about it more on a, on the surface level.
  And you haven‚Äôt really had a chance to explore it in, in depth; you‚Äôve talked about it more on a, on the surface level.
   It‚Äôs one possible option at any rate.  Mhm.
  It is clear to me from the, from the tears that came up the first that, that, uh, this is something you feel a lot of concern about, isn‚Äôt it?
 Mhm.  Mhm. Mhm.
 Mhm. Mhm. But you don‚Äôt have to just tell yourself, ‚ÄúOh, buck up, you can do it.‚Äù  It‚Äôs, it gives you a good chance to really‚Ä¶
 Yeah. Yeah. That‚Äôs the thing isn‚Äôt it?  That to be all alone, with no support from anybody, it sounds like‚Ä¶
 You‚Äôll be alone with a heavy burden and it is a sad prospect really.
  But it feels like reality.  That either you‚Äôd have to give up your children or, or else  make a go of it.
 That‚Äôs when you kind of scold yourself,  really. Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.  So that you really feel you‚Äôre gonna be hemmed in by that.  I mean, your life is gonna be constricted  a good deal.  A lot of the things you‚Äôve been used to you just won‚Äôt have.
 And want for yourself.  Uh-huh.
 So really it does look like a very tough period, doesn‚Äôt it?
 Sort of a new phase of your life? Is it‚Ä¶ it has excitement as well as dread in it, I guess.
 Sort of a new phase of your life? Is it‚Ä¶ it has excitement as well as dread in it, I guess.
  It will be a new adventure but it‚Äôs one that, uh, you feel different ways about.
 ‚ÄòCos it is‚Ä¶well, it is, it is a real sad prospect.  And one, I guess, that you don‚Äôt let out too much to other people, the sad side of it.
 Mhm. Yeah being, being frightened of what you‚Äôre taking on and sad of what you‚Äôre losing for yourself.  Those are two very real  feelings.
 It‚Äôs a goal you‚Äôve been working toward.   Mhm.   I wonder sort of how do your children feel about this?
  Mhm. So that‚Äôs another new part of the‚Ä¶
 ‚ÄúWill he, will he really accept me as a mother?‚Äù
 So that‚Äôs a concern to ya, too.
 ‚ÄúCan we really form a relationship of the kind that both of us would like?‚Äù
 Your asking yourself, ‚ÄúCan we really form a relationship that both of us will like?‚Äù
 You can get a start on that. Mhm.
 Mhm. Mhm.  It‚Äôs a really difficult thing.
 Yeah.  You have quite a little of conflict about, ‚ÄúShould I really be doing this?  Who, who will see it?  What will they say?  Am I wise?‚Äù
  Looks to me as though your eyes are saying something, but I don‚Äôt know what. 
 That made a‚Ä¶
 Mhm.  I guess you‚Äôre saying that I mean a good deal to you.
 Can you tell me what I do mean to you?
 But what does that mean to you?
  You‚Äôd like to have a good match between your life  and what you believe  and value.
 
 It certainly does, that‚Äôs right.
 And that, that has meaning to me.  You‚Äôd like to be sufficiently accepting of yourself, that then you can be comfortable with what your children do or what other people do   and not, uh,  not feel frightened,  thrown off balance.
 Yeah. Mhm. Mhm.    And I‚Äôm interested enough in you to know of any other things in your life that are important to you or that, uh, that are difficult for ya, or whatever.
 But you do have  difficulties in‚Ä¶
 Sounds like it seems kind of mysterious to you.  Why the men lose interest in you.
 Well, that‚Äôs a part of your life in which you just haven‚Äôt had the kind of, um, success that you wish you had had.  Mhm. Mhm. An important lack in some way.
 A little bit.
 I gather what you mean by ‚Äúselling out‚Äù is that if you, if you really put yourself out in kind of an artificial way, you don‚Äôt want that.  Is that what you‚Äôre saying?
 Mhm. Kind of buying his favor,  as it were.  And you just don‚Äôt see yourself doing that.  Don‚Äôt wanna do that.
 Mhm. You say you‚Äôre trying to analyze and analyze and analyze what, ‚Äúwhat lack in me?‚Äù or ‚Äúyou know what lack in me?‚Äô I guess your asking yourself mostly, ‚ÄúWhat lack in me keeps,  keeps me from having a lasting  relationship with men?‚Äù
 But that her saying that  he saying that,  uh, really does touch something in you. ‚ÄúIs there something wrong with me  that I‚Ä¶.‚Äú
 Mhm. It,  it wouldn‚Äôt bother you that much, or you wouldn‚Äôt think so much about it if there wasn‚Äôt something in you that that refers to.
 You‚Äôre saying, ‚ÄúMaybe, maybe I‚Äôm just following the same pattern as my mother.‚Äù
 So you can have good times and all that, but still there is this nagging question or these nagging questions, ‚ÄúAm I just following my mother‚Äôs pattern?‚Äù ‚ÄúWhat is wrong with me that I don‚Äôt have a permanent relationship with a man?‚Äù
 And it‚Äôs the awareness of it that's new.    That you're beginning to realize, ‚ÄúHey, I am different in this respect,    I've learned something.‚Äù
 What are some of those differences?
 M-hm, m-hm.  Sounds as though you feel a bit stronger that way.
 I mean, sounds, sounds like you feel more like a grown-up mother.
 So risking has been the road to learning    in the sexual area.
 And I guess that leads to a, uh, to a deeper kind of learning, or at any rate, a learning that you feel more sure of.  I guess, I get a sense of assurance in what you're talking about. An assurance in you.
 No, I don't
 Uh-huh. No, that makes a lot of sense to me.
 Uh-huh. Because you‚Äôre, you're uh more aware of all aspects of yourself    and it sounds a more acceptant of them too. ‚ÄúYes, I'm mature in certain ways    and here's some ways I know I'm immature.‚Äù
 Sounds as though you, you voice that as a conflict, but it sounds as though really you're more on the, on the side of the second aspect that, uh, uh, to be open and, and in that sense helpless and vulnerable, I guess might be a possible term too, um, is something you, you really believe that's what you are, rather than that you're a totally dependent person and really helpless and have to, have to run for help. I sort of get the feeling you like this aspect of you that is able to be with me in a way that is, uh, more open, more vulnerable perhaps.
 There are the two sides, uh-huh.
    M-hm.     So really to get it more accurately, you scold yourself for for being dependent, for, for wanting    to be here, for example, with me,    and yet at the same time you, you feel. uh, well, that's good, I, I really like that, but where's the, where's the integration of those two, uh, points of view.     
 Sure. M-hm.  
 Okay.
 M-hm, m-hm, m-hm. Really would be giving yourself a gift if you could just kind of let go    and not, uh, not be so     competent    and able.       
 M-hm, m-hm. And you feel some contact and maybe you can say, ‚ÄúWell, maybe I don't have to be so strong, so     Maybe I can just let go more.‚Äù
  Have to be kind of silent, to let go of that rational and rationalizing part of you.
 Are there any things that sort of come bubbling up?
 Okay.  M-hm.      But it's not easy, huh.
 You feel what an awful thing it is that I'm attracted to black people.  
 That sounds like not only your family looks down on it or something but that you scold yourself for it too.
 Yeah, that's it.
 ‚ÄúWhat kind of a crazy person am I that I feel attracted    to so many blacks?‚Äù
 Sick, that's
 You really feel that there's something sick in you that causes you to have so many black friends.
 So there isn't any reason except that you feel that way.
 And that isn't good enough.
 You feel ‚ÄúI should not feel that way. I shouldn't be that way. Sick.‚Äù
 Mm, see if it shows.    M-hm, m-hm.
 It has something to do with the sexual attraction.
 So I guess you're saying, um, yeah, there's a sexual element in it but
    That's partly your fantasy or something.    
 In a way you're saying it out loud and really in a wa ..., in a sense, publicly, may help you to feel ‚ÄúI don't need to be so ashamed of that.‚Äù  
 But you feel disapproved of probably, certainly by your family and maybe by the culture in this respect.
 M-hm, m-hm.      Makes you feel different.      Set apart or something like that.  
 So that somehow you know you're not alone in this.
 M-hm. So Okay, other women feel the same way but not to the degree that you do, you think.    That's kind of out of    Out of scale.
 Maybe someday you won't be ashamed of yourself for that.
 Uh-huh, m-hm. So, perhaps what you are and what you feel will be something you can take real satisfaction in instead of feeling      how shameful.
 Feel this is a risk.     And that's a sign of learning and of growth.
 M-hm, m-hm.    So that's seen as another strange part of you.
 Not so.
 Instead of asking, ‚ÄúDo I feel as though I'm finished with it?    Do I feel as though I'm escaping from it?‚Äù
 The feeling is one of uncertainty.
 ‚ÄúWhat did I say? What did I feel?‚Äù You'd like to have a rerun of it and it
 Sounds like you scold yourself for that, as though, ‚ÄúOh, I just talk talk-talk.‚Äù       It didn't sound like just talk-talk-talk to me.
 No.
 M-hm.    Let me give you a very brief rerun of part of it. You were saying, ‚ÄúI'm ashamed of myself for being attracted to black men. Uh, I know many other women have some of the same feeling, but it seems to me I have that feeling disproportionately strong and uh my family is critical of that, the culture is critical. Um, I'd like to be able to accept those feelings in myself. Maybe I'm making a little bit of progress along that line, but still it does seem a need to be a a strange part of me that I don't understand.‚Äù     
 ‚ÄúAnd part of that attraction is sexual but I'm also attracted to their children, to the way they live, to a lot of things about them.‚Äù 
 It just is, but you can't quite uh can't quite get at the reasons for it. You have to have the reasons.
 M-hm.    So maybe the intellectual understanding isn't as important as you thought it was.
 ‚ÄúIf I could accept it, I wouldn't have to understand in the sense of knowing the reasons.‚Äù
 Sounds like that's what you're doing in imagination a lot, trying to explain it to somebody.
 M-hm.    It may be one of those things that if you can accept it, you wouldn't need to have all the explanations.  
 M-hm. It's a broader statement of it.
 M-hm. You would in general feel ‚ÄúI have to justify myself with proper reasons.‚Äù
 I suspect we all do, some.    M-hm.
  You feel things are all going wrong and you are crushed by criticism.
  You feel that the roots go back a long way, but that you have never really belonged, even in grammar school.
  Things have been so bad you feel perhaps you‚Äôre really abnormal.
  Excuse me.  You speak pretty rapidly and I can‚Äôt get it all down in my notes.  Would it bother you if I set up a microphone and recorded the interview on this machine?
 Now just forget that‚Äôs there and you‚Äôll be all right.  You used to get high grades and you used to‚Äî
  You said that you were hurt so much?
  Your studying and your good grades and all you felt was just something sort of separate from the rest of your life and didn‚Äôt help you very much.
  You feel your studying and your work was a way of getting away from things?
  Even just little things ‚Äì just ordinary things, give you a lot of trouble.
  So, instead of making progress, things don‚Äôt really get any better at all.
 We can help you go about working on your own problems, but a lot of what happens will be up to you.
 I won‚Äôt be giving you a lot of answers, except to help you work through some of the answers that you would be satisfied with.  It‚Äôs just like you say ‚Äì someone may say, ‚ÄúYou‚Äôre nuts‚Äù and some people may say, ‚ÄúNo, you‚Äôre normal.‚Äù  Well, I could tell you you‚Äôre normal, somebody else could, somebody else could tell you you‚Äôre nuts.  There‚Äôs no ‚Äì the thing that really matters is how you really feel about yourself.
 You feel very different from others and you don‚Äôt see how you can fix that.
 You realize that the roots must go a long way back, and that at some point you will have to start in reworking it, but you‚Äôre not sure whether you can do it.
 The future doesn‚Äôt look very bright when you look at it that way.
 Logically, you realize that courage is one of your deficiencies, but inside yourself you find yourself laughing at that notion and feeling that it doesn‚Äôt really have anything to do with you.  Is that it?
 M-hm.  You sort of say that might apply to other people but it‚Äôs not for you because you‚Äôre different.
 You really wonder whether anybody else could be ‚Äì
 You think about making the struggle, but it doesn‚Äôt seem possible.
 You feel that you‚Äôd like to know how somebody else would handle it.
 The highest peak you ever reach is just not to feel bad.  And, on the other hand, if any little thing happens of a negative sort that throws you clear down ‚Äì well, I see our time is up for today.  Want to come back next week?
  You‚Äôre really puzzled, aren‚Äôt you, whether or not to come back?
 You‚Äôre coming back to that question again, aren‚Äôt‚Äô you ‚Äì wondering ‚Äì well, I could answer that question ‚Äì yes.
  Well, you say the word on whether or not you‚Äôd like to come back next week.  
  O.K.  (Time is set.
  You feel that other people can be of some help but you realize, too, that the essence of it has somehow got to be in you.
  You really aren‚Äôt‚Äô sure what ‚Äì what you‚Äôre aiming toward.
  Well, I see our time is about up.  Want to come back next week?
   I think I would have to leave it that ‚Äì a ‚Äì it comes back to the question ‚Äì do you feel you want to work on it?  If you do, we‚Äôll save time next week.  If you feel that it is so hopeless that nothing can be done ‚Äì
  Well ‚Äì how do you want to use the time today?
   M-hm.  You felt that you gained something from reading that book that indicated that not getting along with a group wasn‚Äôt necessarily abnormal, but that it might be a constant effort to keep building an association with a group.  Is that it?  But it still leaves you feeling ‚Äúwhere do I start?‚Äù  Is that right?
   You feel that it wouldn‚Äôt be fair, and at the same time there rises in your mind a question, are you just putting that up to keep from undertaking what would be a hard thing to do.
   You feel perhaps I should know the answers, then.
   You feel you might really be cheating the employer by doing that.
   You are wondering that, too, aren‚Äôt you, whether maybe the answer is in you?
   You realize that it would mean a pretty radical shift if ‚Äì uh ‚Äì if you tried some of those things.
   You think that maybe it would be a tough proposition, but maybe it would really have a lot in it for you.
   You realize that, even if you did that, there‚Äôd still be plenty of unanswered questions and plenty of difficulty still ahead.
   You feel that somehow you have to kind of go deeper than just face these things in a book.
   In other words, you realize that you have come across many good ideas ‚Äì probably sound ideas, and so on ‚Äì but that doesn‚Äôt always mean you can accept them.
   M-hm.  If I get your feeling there ‚Äì it‚Äôs just sort of a patchwork thing ‚Äì you might take one idea from a book and even use it ‚Äì but then what?  I mean it just doesn‚Äôt ‚Äì
   You feel probably that there‚Äôs got to be something in the individual that goes on from that point.
  You‚Äôre wondering if you put into effect some of the steps that look to you good from books and so on ‚Äì would that really lead to knowing what to do next.
   You feel that, so far, the best you have been able to achieve along that line is just to take a goal that seems to be good for somebody else.  But that you don‚Äôt feel that there‚Äôs any real gain that you are sure you want.
   You have tried to figure out what are the things you really want, and yet you can‚Äôt think that there are any such things.
   You know that you do have some desires, and sometimes they‚Äôre ‚Äì quite clear, but in general when you really try to figure out what you want, you‚Äôre just not sure.
   You feel that it would be quite a step forward if you were sure of the place you wanted to go.
   Well, I mean that in a general sense ----
   Things you wanted to reach.
   In other words, sometimes you wonder, even if you could do that, would that help you.
   If you had some really genuine goal, it might do a lot for some of these other things that trouble you too.
   Wanted:  one goal.  Hmmmmm?
   In other words, if you had a goal, even an immediate goal and you had reached it, you could feel your progress, but when your thinking about your goal keeps shifting, then ‚Äì you just don‚Äôt quite know where you are.  Is that it?
   You feel that you‚Äôre not quite willing to set the lower intermediate goals and still you know you are not really equipped to reach some high-up or far-off goals.  Is that it?
   In yourself.
   That is, you‚Äôre wondering if you ‚Äì picked some goal like a job or something that you could definitely work on, would that really change any of your basic thinking or would it just be a temporary distraction, kind of?
   You feel that just putting it to one side or shoving it out of mind for a little bit, that isn‚Äôt quite the thing you are looking for or what would really help.
   At least you are wondering whether you could really tackle what you feel is wrong with your ideas as well as what you do.
   You feel it must really be a petty way of thinking about the whole situation that distorts your thinking about others and their attitudes toward you.
   You feel that that might be another forward march, hmmm?
   If you try to put some trust in other people ‚Äì and ‚Äì be ‚Äì to feel they‚Äôre broadminded and tolerant ‚Äì then you‚Äôre pretty sure they‚Äôll ‚Äúdo you dirt‚Äù and disillusion you.
   You feel you have to figure that no one is perfect all the time, that you make some slips and they make some slips.
   You feel that might be your real aim ‚Äì simply to be able to do things as well as the next person ‚Äì is that it?
   That‚Äôs fastening your whole scheme outside of yourself again.  Is that what you mean?
   You feel that no matter what you might do, always you would be judging yourself by what others think of you.  Is that it?
   It just floors you.
   You wonder whether there are different degrees of introspection?
   Yes, I think so.
   You feel it can be overdone.
   You‚Äôve run out of things to talk about.
   You are puzzled to know whether anybody ever really gets up to the point of their ideals or the place where they have set their goals.  Is that ----
   Does anybody really feel satisfied that they have reached their own goals ‚Äì satisfied with themselves.
  In other words, your own evaluation of yourself fluctuates so that it‚Äôs very discouraging.
  One minute you feel pretty good, and the next you‚Äôd sell yourself for a dime a dozen.
  You feel as though maybe it‚Äôs your devil anyway.
  You just feel that gnaws away at you.
   I ‚Äì I‚Äôm just trying to understand that. In other words you‚Äôre feeling that it is possibly because you are egotistical that this whole business matters so much, and causes so much difficulty.
  You feel that the same motive power that drives some people who‚Äôve had inferiority complexes might really destroy somebody else because it wasn‚Äôt turned in the right channel.
  You feel that either you have that very depressed feeling of inadequacy, or you go clear to the other extreme which you don‚Äôt like either ‚Äì of a very smug feeling that this is beneath me ‚Äì I‚Äôm too good for this activity.
  M-hm.
  You feel that it‚Äôs some little devil right in your own attitudes.
  You feel that maybe way down deep you‚Äôve sort of felt that things should be easy and perfect for you or else you won‚Äôt take them at all.
  You have felt that it wasn‚Äôt quite, mm ‚Äì proper to be in a situation where it was a real struggle to make‚Ä¶
  You feel it‚Äôs the kind of struggling in between that you have never quite been willing to face or to take.
  You feel you can see those roots of it going ‚Äì back into some of those experiences.
  You wonder why you accepted that kind of a world.
  The sleeping princess just wasn‚Äôt awakened.
 You expected to reach the goal without the work or struggle that went in between.
 You enjoyed it, but I take it you felt that even then that wasn‚Äôt quite what you wanted.
  Well, I see our time‚Äôs up ‚Äì
  Next Monday?
  Well, till five.
  Yes.
  Well, I ‚Äì it‚Äôs hard to say, it all depends on how my schedule fills up. But if you want to, you could take one of those times and I would save it if you wanted to use it. Would you like to leave it that way, or would you rather call me and let me know when you want to come in?
  Well, try and call me by Thursday or Friday if you can.  O.K.?
  What‚Äôs what today?
  You feel you make certain progress in an interview but after that it kind of slips.
  You feel that it doesn‚Äôt quite carry over to life in between times.
  As I get that, you‚Äôve done some things about it, I mean like trying to mingle a little bit more with people, but it still leaves something to be desired.
  You‚Äôve enjoyed getting more of an understanding of other people, and even tried to apply some of that understanding to you, but without much effect.
  Your mother tries to assure you that you are doing all right, but I take it that you feel that if you were really just being a good listener that would be one thing but actually the motivation behind listening is a little bit different.
  I‚Äôm not sure, let me see if I do.  That you want to really deserve inside some of the approval, etc., you might get from other people.  I that, uh ‚Äì
  There‚Äôs plenty of proof that you don‚Äôt deserve approval.  Is that it?
  At any rate, you can‚Äôt help but feel a little bit disappointed, perhaps, in the lack of obvious change in you, even though, on the other hand, you realize that it probably is somewhat likely to be a slow process since the problem has been present for a long time.
  So that the very time that one part of you is perhaps really taking hold of this whole situation, another part of you is just sabotaging the whole business.
  You realize that the courage that people normally need to meet life you just feel in yourself has been all deflated.
  You experienced a long series of defeats and the notion of taking the offensive is pretty difficult.
  No matter what you might strive to undertake you still feel as though it‚Äôs a very risky gamble.
  You realize you really might take more of a gambling attitude but you just find it necessary to take the possibility of loss very, very seriously.
  You feel that every experience is something you must measure up to.
  You have to start from scratch.
  You don‚Äôt have any accumulated savings that you can bring along with you, but you must absolutely start fresh with each experience to prove it.
  The necessity of proving something about yourself is always there.
  In other words, in a sense, even when an experience does prove something about yourself, still you can‚Äôt accept the proof.  That is, you might do something well and you would have reason to say, ‚ÄúWell, I did a good job on that,‚Äù but you couldn‚Äôt even feel that way.
  Any acceptance of it would be just a surface acceptance.
  M-hm.
  So that in a sense ‚Äì you have thought about this enough ‚Äì and you want to put something into action.  Is that, uh ‚Äì
  M-hm.
  It‚Äôs almost that when you want to turn in a positive direction that an even stronger force within you throws up all kinds of doubt about it.
 You feel that your doubting force is definitely stronger than your constructive force.
  You just felt that the armies of doubt are definitely unbeatable armies.
  And that the other is a pretty weak and struggling thing.
  You feel you kind of tossed in an unconditional surrender         rather than ‚Äì just because you believed the other forces were impossibly strong.
  M-hm.
  As long as someone else was in charge, why, it was O.K., you got along, but when it came to a question of doing something on your own ability, in your own direction, to choose and manage, why you don‚Äôt have any luck.
  It boils down again to what‚Äôs come up in some other ways, doesn‚Äôt it, that you just trust others  and believe in them, but belief in yourself, that‚Äôs just impossible.
  You feel that something should have turned up to give you that confidence in yourself.
  You feel very deeply about it, that even a little child feels so much pleasure in standing on his own two feet.
  They say the rain makes things grow.
  You feel that because of some of her very real needs that ‚Äì she did a great deal for you and you accepted it and depended on her.
  You stood on her two feet.
 You watched your sister stand out against some of your mother‚Äôs thinking, and some of your mother‚Äôs requests, but when you were in that stage you couldn‚Äôt ‚Äì you didn‚Äôt feel it was quite right to stand up against her on any of those issues.
  Those guilt feelings made you feel you couldn‚Äôt trust yourself even though before you thought that you were right in standing up for something.
  M-hm.
  That‚Äôs a very deep question you keep facing me with ‚Äì whether a person who for twenty years has been guided by the thinking and standards of others could possibly feel that they could take the reins into their own hands.
  How goes it today?
  What is the weather like today?
  Before you come in, you feel there‚Äôs just nothing.
  You feel that you‚Äôve made progress, that you‚Äôre doing something that you‚Äôve wanted to do.  Now that you decided to do it, you feel that you don‚Äôt have any illusions about what will come from it, is that it?
  Sounds also as though that‚Äôs something you decided for yourself ‚Äì did by yourself.
  It really gets you when she takes hold of something that you had started, and then tries to make a crusade or it or push it very hard.
  You feel she‚Äôs sort of taking it out of your hands ‚Äì is that it?
  M-hm.
  You feel that in some very real ways ‚Äì you just don‚Äôt like your mother particularly well, and it bothers you that you should feel that way.
  The minute you‚Äôre out, the ghost is too.
  The old doubt that you could be worthwhile to anyone else.  You still feel that your friendship doesn‚Äôt offer very much to anyone else.
  And the tears come because you don‚Äôt feel as though you really are good for anything to anyone else.
  You think it‚Äôs foolish to weep a little.
  All right.
  You found that you have gained something from reading it.
  You feel that you‚Äôve really noticed that you‚Äôre becoming a different kind of person.
  You feel that where you used to be trying for something way up high now it is different.
  You feel that with you it was just something that you parroted, while with them it was something that they really had learned for themselves and knew in themselves.
  You feel that you put up a good front but underneath you have not made the knowledge really yours.
  You feel that you‚Äôre not entirely different from others and that you can get some measure of happiness for yourself.
  You feel that in the past you lived by others‚Äô standards and you are not sure just what is the right thing to do, but you‚Äôre beginning to feel that the best thing for you is simply to accept yourself as you are.
  You realize that some people might think your present attitude would keep you from moving ahead, but you know within yourself that you tried adopting standards that were not your own and that doesn‚Äôt work.
  You sound as though you had your mind pretty well made up yourself and that you had decided to try to accept yourself as you are.
  You feel as though these talks and the thinking you‚Äôve been doing have just changed you so you feel more comfortable with yourself.
  You find that you can even feel hatred toward somebody and not be bothered about it.
  You feel that all this has made a great deal of difference in your own comfort.  I‚Äôve noticed the changes, too, and have wondered when you would break through and realize that they have occurred.
  You have felt that you have built up a real relationship there and it has helped to have them like you.
  You feel that rather than any relationship of understanding, you‚Äôve just lived for a pat on the back from your dad.
  Now you‚Äôve come to understand that sort of situation in your own experience.
  It made you afraid of looking clearly at yourself.
  You‚Äôve come to believe that you can get along like others.
  You feel that she has come to accept the fact that, although the other person might be brighter, still she thinks, ‚ÄúI‚Äôve got some good qualities, too.‚Äù
  Looking at herself that way makes it easier for her to adjust to others.  
  Yes, you have come a long way and you really have faced some of these things pretty deeply.
  You‚Äôre comfortable about the fact that if you can find a mutually congenial partnership, well, then, you will get married.  If not, you think you can live without it.  
  You really have been making friendships and taking yourself out into social activities.
  You feel that both of you are facing similar situations and that makes it easier.
  You still have that terrible feeling that there isn‚Äôt anything that you can point to ‚Äì and solid achievement that you have had.
  Even though you would like the achievement, it helps to understand the basis for the lack of it.
  You really respected the fact that she could realize the limitations of her own ability.
  I expect we all see examples of that.
  You feel that the discrepancy might be so great that it would really make him ashamed of her and unhappy in that way.
  You feel that being your real self makes you more comfortable, and makes your friends comfortable in accepting you, but could it work in a permanent relationship?
  You feel that the husband might have real flaws in his personality which would sort of make up for a slight lack of ability on your part.
  Your deficiency seems pretty great to you and you wonder if you really ever will give up the heights you used to want.
  You recognize that there is really a big change in yourself.
  You‚Äôve said a lot.
  I suppose it is.  You found, at any rate, when you work so planfully at it, it just didn‚Äôt get across and now you feel more comfortable with yourself and less anxious about the whole thing.
  You feel that you‚Äôre being guided more by the real feelings within yourself than you used to be.
  You‚Äôre putting out more of your interest in them.
  You‚Äôre finding that forgetting yourself and forgetting sales is really good business in the long run.
  You‚Äôre really getting a feeling of success out of that job.
  You feel that being more natural yourself has made people respond to you.
  You‚Äôre sure that these things have happened, but still it seems to you that it might be too good to be true, that you might slump again.
  You feel this might be just another temporary wave of encouragement.
  You feel if you do get discouraged it will be primarily because you‚Äôre impatient about getting somewhere in too much of a hurry.
  You think that you have a new self now, but that you might not like it in time.
  You feel that that is very important, that you no longer desire to be above everybody but if you can even be equal to some of them you can then live with yourself and feel it will be all right.
 You‚Äôve always respected and looked up to that intellectual group and now it comes kind of hard to accept the fact that perhaps you don‚Äôt belong there but in another group.
  I see our time is up.  Will you be wanting to come back or not?
  All right.  You call the office and they‚Äôll give you an appointment even if I‚Äôm not in.  You really have come a long way in your thinking, haven‚Äôt you?
  Good-bye.
 Couldn't get your nerve up to that point.
 Mhm. It was a matter then of actually making the steps.
 M-hm.
 You feel that it's almost too late.
 Everything all mixed up and nothing matters.
 You don't know what the matter is, but you want to come in for a series of talks with me. Yes, that's possible.
 Well, you are a student here, aren't you?
 There is no charge for students. Charge for nonstudents, but not for students.
 It's hard to know how deep it is, or how much there is in it.
 It's really different.
 You no longer have any sense of where you're going.
 You can't understand yourself why you didn't do that extra bit.
 It's gone on like that increasingly.
 And you look back and feel that you handled a pretty heavy load and handled it 0.K., and you seemed to know what you were doing.
 Now you don't handle the load and you feel that
 Everything's kind'a futile.
  You felt that made it look kind‚Äôa bad for you.
 
 M-hm. All the high aims that you had when you came here  just melted.
 You can't understand how you could have let your personal relationships go to pieces that way.
 You had every reason for your keeping in touch with them in someway; and yet somehow you didn't.
 Ordinary things that you would expect to take care of, you don't.
 All the way from important things like friends to little things like your nails you've just sort of let things go.
 You find you have really avoided the very people that you would like to have some contact with.
 You've sort of pulled away from a lot of the things, and a lot of the people, that used to have meaning for you.
 M-hm. M-hm. Whatever goes on, it just doesn't have any really deep meaning for you.
 You've really cut yourself off perhaps by the way you handled the correspondence and so on.
 You've really been a puzzle to yourself in this sense.
 You were a little bit 'high' during that period but really not working very hard.
 You feel there you worked right up to the crucial point but then didn't do the last thing.
 Up to this point you've really met your responsibilities.
 You feel it would be quite impossible to really take responsibility.
 You haven't quite admitted the situation to yourself or made use of the resources that you might have.
 M-hm. You feel that what's happening just doesn't seem real, and you don't like to have that feeling.
 You knew it on one basis, but still it just didn't quite seem to sink in or have any meaning.
 During those times you are sure you're all alone and won't be disturbed, and sure that nobody could really expect you to take any responsibility, then things seem okay.
 You just really don't know anything.
 You feel guilty about what you haven't done, and it gives you more reason for avoiding the people that..
" M-hm. So that from feeling ""My, what a fortunate chance to work with her"", gradually to the point where you hoped you wouldn't see her."
 M-hm. You feel that you have pulled away from all the people it would be logical that you should be associating with.
 You can just find ways of putting in the time with the newspaper.
 Felt your emotions were being appreciative, and so on; but you just weren't really there at all  as far as listening to him.
 Just can't tell whether you've been putting on a kind of behavior because you know that's just regarded as being neurotic. Is that it?
 Really you used to be able to get organized and going early in the morning, and now all that is changed.
 That is, you haven't been doing things that you've been in the habit of saying were important to you, and that has made you wonder whether were those aims and goals really sincere goals.
 Here was the chance that you've been looking for for a long time and had a chance to do a very significant job, and actually what you have done could have been turned out
 You've really been going backwards rather than forwards.
 Sometimes you can't find motivation  or something.
 You can see the things that should be done, but just not doing them.
 Really don't respond to the situations
 You felt you kept the relationship on a pretty surface basis even when you knew she was concerned about things; and even the fact that she was concerned didn't bother you the way
 Felt again you went through the motions, and put through the call; but you really didn't want to hear him and was glad he wasn't home.
 Didn't make any move toward going home.
 First you thought you would; then you decided you wouldn't. Then you had to avoid people because they thought you were going home. Time's about up, isn't it? Would you like to Monday and Friday is all
 Onethirty Monday?
 Well okay then; how about twothirty?
 You'll be in on Monday
 Let's pull your chair a little closer.
 All right; do you want to go ahead?
 You feel somewhat less abnormal and more just the result of the guilt feeling that you felt because you had told people you were going home. Does that seem it?
 Something very different from you.
  You've had a pretty wasted year.
  It just drifted along without any compass.
 You're puzzled as to why the very year when everything should be just right you would choose to have a year of drifting.
 Before you had a reason for doing things and now the reasons for doing things and now the reasons for doing things seem to have kind‚Äôa dropped away.
  Mhm.  You really feel pleased that another hour has gone by.
 One more hour over with, is that it?
   And things went sort‚Äôa bad for each one. It somehow made you feel you had nothing to hang on to. Is that it?
 M-hm.  Somehow they weren‚Äôt getting along and it hardly seemed worthwhile for you to go on. Is that it?
 M-hm.  M-hm. They weren‚Äôt too successful in their work or their relationships.  How could you expect to be?
  It seemed as if it was evidence that your family really couldn't get places; and you were part of the family, and you probably would not get places either.
 You can't see how you could have accomplished so little; and I take it the whole year just doesn't sound like a real experience, even though you don't quite like to put it that way.
 It seems really that it isn't really possible that that much time could have gone by, and so little to show for it.
  M-hm
   M-hm.
   You don't really think that it was the courses that are at the bottom of your
 Then it 's really easier for you to understand the present situation than it is to see how you could have felt so confident and assured earlier and still didn't get much done. Is that t?
 Then you feel that your achievement has been awfully poor in comparison with others.
   M-hm. There is a very real difference between the way you handled your affairs in the past and the way you fail to plan ahead and look forward at the present time.
  M-hm.  It seems disappointing to still be working toward attempts to do things, when you had thought you 'd really be attaining it.
  M-hm.
  M-hm.  It‚Äôs just the gradual realization that you are not as far toward the goal as you hoped.  Is that it?
  Sort‚Äô a knocked the props out from under you.
  You have quite a little attraction to work that wouldn‚Äôt take so long in training and that would be more definite during the time when you were doing it.
  Know when you began and know when you‚Äôre through.
  Think maybe it was a mistake instead to pick the educational path which you did.
  That really maybe a simpler goal would have been more satisfying.
  And then that raises the question whether you could have really chosen a simpler goal; and you‚Äôre not sure that you would have been satisfied with the idea of having that goal.
  M-hm.
 That is that you feel that on the one hand you're trying to push yourself into this program, and at the same time you yourself are avoiding being pushed into it. Is that it?
  Pulling both ways within yourself.
 M-hm. Part of yourself that says, ‚ÄúNo, I don't wish to go into this,‚Äù is the part that at the present time [is] really governing your life‚Ä¶
  It's hard to know what the outcome will be.
  Mhm.
 M-hm. That's the way I feel.  I know that at the dormitory we sometimes go downstairs in the Lounge in the evening. Go down and talk, or play cards or something. But I used to do that fairly often, and now I never go down and when I go down I don't stop to talk to people very much, and  unless it‚Äôs someone I happen to know. For some reason I seem to [be] different  to have gotten to know a lot of people when I first moved into the dorm  and they are still there; so I know a lot of people, but otherwise the acquaintances I've made over this quarter are  this quarter I just haven't met anyone. I've just not tried. And some of the kids who knew me first last quarter, or the quarter before that  often say, Alice, you don't ever come downstairs, or, why don't you come sit in the Lounge occasionally?  And I tell them I'm busy. Why, I'm not really busy. I'm just sitting up in my room. And yet, once in a while, if I sort'a force myself to go out among people I feel more natural.
 Mhm. M-hm. On the one hand you feel that you just don't care to make an effort to make contacts with people or even keep up your contacts with people...
 And yet when you do you feel somehow better or more natural, or something.
  Mhm.
  M-hm.
 M-hm. It is quite surprising that they haven't noticed more of a change which to you is fairly significant.
  Mhm. And you feel basically it may be a slow or cumulative thing; but that the sharper changes have taken place rather recently.
  You're not so sure you were a pet in any sense, but more that the family situation seemed to hold you to pretty high standards.
  M-hm. With somebody else it would just be just  Oh be a little naughtiness; but as far as you were concerned, it shouldn't be done.
  M-hm. Not sure whether you really have any deep values which you are sure of.
  You've been doubting that for some time.
  You have no certain measuring rods that you can use.
  Well, I think there are several minutes more.
 In other words, what you did was always in the direction of trying to keep things smooth and to make other people feel better and to smooth the situation.
   You feel that for a long time you've been playing the role of kind of smoothing out the frictions or differences or what not...
 Rather than having any opinion or reaction of your own in the situation. Is that it?
 Whatever kind of person that was needed to kind'a help out that situation you'd be that kind of person rather than being anything original or deeply your own.
 In other words it's been kind of a planful campaign in each case rather than because you really felt that way or really wanted to be that kind of person. Is that it?
 There's something a little bit false somehow about it.
 I guess our time is up for today. And -  would you like to came in Monday?
  Let me see  I think  How about 2:30 Monday?
  Want to pull your chair a little bit closer?
  You have a rather soft voice ‚Äì but it comes through.
  You felt that even though it is such a little thing, maybe it means something significant because you have put it off so much, is that it?
 It‚Äôs hard to see why it seemed difficult at the time.
 You were just sure he was trying to make things smooth and trying to avoid upsetting you, is that ?
  You feel that both your family and your friends, and all, are really accepting of you as a person that is able to function, and if you can decide to function, that‚Äôs the question.
  So that if you could begin to more right ahead today, why, probably that would work, but you know there are lots of reasons why that is hardly feasible.
  At least today things don‚Äôt look quite as bleak or futile.
  You feel there‚Äôs so many things to be straightened out, if you were to move ahead; it makes you wonder if you should try to move ahead with your school work, or whether you should drop it for the time being, is that it?
  It would take a long time to get things straightened out and that would be expensive and so on, and that would give you concern. 
  That side of the picture doesn‚Äôt look very satisfying to you either, if you just dropped everything, and tried to get a job, that doesn‚Äôt look too good, is that it?
  M-hm.
  You feel you‚Äôd always, or at least for a long time, be pretty likely to feel ‚Äì well, guilty, or a little remorseful at the ‚Äì how little had happened this last year.
  You‚Äôll always kind of carry that load of responsibility with you for not having somehow handled yourself differently.
 You feel that if you just keep up with your current responsibilities, you‚Äôll be doing pretty well.
  Well, - I don‚Äôt know.  That might be ‚Äì I haven‚Äôt seen it, they‚Äôre filed away, I don‚Äôt know anything about it myself.
  You sort of felt that you‚Äôd like to know about the Rorschach, is that ---?
  Well, we haven‚Äôt used them except for research purposes-
  But there are, if you mean is it possible to discuss the finding with the person, yes it is.
  Just a little curious to know what your responses look like to someone else, is that it?
  Well, we ‚Äì frankly we aren‚Äôt doing anything with them yet, except filing them away.  Just part of a research project, on which we may get to work after a time.
  You felt you were getting kind of worn down by the time you were getting through those. 
  That is, for a time you really felt you were pretty abnormal, but you don‚Äôt feel that way quite so much at the present time, is that‚Ä¶ ?
  You feel that being fearful that you were losing your mind would make you less efficient in your work than would be the case otherwise.
  You can‚Äôt quite conceive of all those things happening to you.
  You‚Äôre really not sure that you‚Äôve gone into it enough yet to really get any, much deeper understanding of it.
  Pretty hard to know where to go from here.  Whether to go deeper or not.
  You feel you‚Äôve had so many experiences in the past where without too much thought or planfulness on your part things have worked out, and maybe you‚Äôve gotten to the point of just a little bit expecting miracles without getting into the causes of things, or without being too concerned about the planning, is that‚Ä¶?
  You sort of feel that without really intending to you have kind of come to depend on miracles.
  You felt that either the fates were pretty good to you, or you got some kind of advance warning so you could tell what was coming and be a little bit prepared for it.
 You have worked but you‚Äôve also had some pretty good breaks in luck and so on in seeing you through different tough spots.
  That doesn‚Äôt explain the fact that you recently have been pretty ineffective, is that what you mean?
  The problem of time has been a pretty important one recently.
  When you see people that have really completed something they‚Äôve started it just doesn‚Äôt seem possible.
  You‚Äôve just stopped.
  You felt inwardly glad that you‚Äôd have no contact with anyone.
  You felt that you didn‚Äôt make any adequate use of time, just got it all out of joint, is that?
  You knew you were doing absurd things really, but you did them.
  Awfully hard to understand yourself, as to why you do some of those things.
  Again you‚Äôre aware of what you ought to do, but still that doesn‚Äôt insure that you‚Äôll do it.
  Everything else is in place except whatever it takes to bridge over between knowing what you should do and actually carrying it out.
  You feel a little more like you really are living.
  And if you could do more, you‚Äôd feel more that way.
  M-hm. Well, I don't know the answer to that myself. I know some people do ‚Äì I mean, some people really plan for interviews and some do not, and I think probably it 's very much of -
  You feel a little bit as though you aren't making, as rapid progress as you wish you were, is that it?
  You notice some changes and you think it's - maybe it's the first step but, still it's - it seems a little slow to you, huh?
  You feel the lessening of anxiety might be bad because you might let things stand as they are.
 You feel that up until now you've just really opened things up, I mean, just made more clear just where you are at this point, but that really you haven't begun to think very deeply yet.
  M-hm.
  In other words, some of the really bad aspects have cleared up a bit but now where do you go?
  It's hard to know what is significant, what angle should we tackle.
  You know that some experiences that you've had have been pretty influential, but whether those are the ones that are significant to talk about now, or that have to do with your present situation, I take it, that's what you don't feel sure of.
  What keeps you from being effective.
  M-hm. In other words, at that time several years ago, you feel you really were functioning okay and going in a suitable direction.
  You really seemed to have a pretty good adjustment in various phases of life.
  You feel that perhaps you've been blocked by things that other  people might somehow surmount or assimilate them or -
  Why should a little thing like an incomplete have ‚Äì seem to have so much importance and really to ‚Äì sort of freeze you temporarily.
   M-hm.
  M-hm. If I get it, you got started on it by inadvertence and letting someone else take too much initiative, and then somebody else thought it was a good plan, somebody else thought this was the way you should do it and so on.  And you feel you went along with that all the time and really eventually doing pretty well on it, but still getting to the point where you just couldn‚Äôt look it in the face again.
  M-hm.
  You really wanted to be taking courses, be here on campus.  Instead you were consorting with jailbirds and people who shot their sisters in law.
  Really as you look back on it, it should have been ‚Äì you should have felt more satisfaction in it somehow than you did.
  That is, your heart was really more in the physical development problem.
  You've gradually come to see more significance in it than you saw or felt at the time.
  You really felt that you should have finished up that study and it came over you
  You felt you no longer had any excuse for not doing it, but it's just that you didn't do it.
  When what?
  You think that if people really leave things up to you, not too much happens, not too much gets done.
  It hasn't always been that way, but at least there's something about this whole experience that you feel is kind of a turning point or a beginning of something.
  Sort of seemed to feel the pincers in that, and felt you had to show some steps and couldn't‚Ä¶
  M-hm. You felt somehow you should have been able to handle it better rather than - that is, there must have been something else in the picture to make you so tense about it.
  It would be kind of nice to lay it to the difficulties in the research, but actually you feel that it goes back before that.
  M-hm. You feel that if you'd just plugged along, that would have been quite satisfactory, rather than getting so upset about what you felt was expected of you.
  As you look it over coolly you wonder why did you feel that so much was expected of you, why did you have such a struggle about that.
  Really some pretty deep feelings about it..
  You wonder a little bit about it, but at least at the time it didn't‚Ä¶seem too upsetting or too significant.
  That is the friendship with the young man and the research did come at the same time, but whether or not they were.... whether or not the friendship was one of the things that caused you to be worried or upset about it, that you don't - you‚Äôre not quite sure of.
  It doesn't seem to you that that could have affected you very much.
  There was some concern about it at that same period, about your brother.
  At least you don't see as yet any way that those things fit together very significantly.
  Seems as though you should have been able to handle the various things that
  I guess our time‚Äôs about up for today.  Come in again Monday?
  Yes.
 It‚Äôs a warm day, today.
 Would you like to pull your chair a little bit closer?
 You realize your evading him.
 You felt it was sort of useless to talk with him.  Is that what you mean?
 I see.
 You feel it would be helpful, but you wouldn‚Äôt have much to report that you had done.  Is that ah‚Ä¶.
 It sort of surprised you that you had been staying away.
 That looks bad too.
  So that again it seemed like a sharp change in your own behavior, is that, is that it?
 You're sort of letting things drift past, even though you have enjoyed the associations there, in the department of S____________.
 You sort of realize, even more, how much you've been staying out of the way of things. Does that ah...
 Mhm, It's sort of surprising to you to find out how much you have done that.
 Even when you felt it was difficult beforehand, actually you found it worthwhile, in the past.
 You feel that really would have been a wise step.
" You find yourself dwelling, to some extent, on the notion that, ‚ÄúIf I had done this at that time, things would have been a lot simpler,"" Is that..."
 You tend to dwell a little more on what you didn't do in the past, rather than on what might be done right now or in the future.
 That's something you're really, really tackling, I take it, but, ah, you don't feel very sure that results will be good.
 Sort of in fits and starts?
 You feel that occasionally you sort of defeated yourself a little bit by that which you've done.
 You're very apathetic toward some things...until you get into it, and then it goes better, mhm.
 It really goes back to that, that you‚Äôre not quite sure what the major things are that you‚Äôre shooting toward, is that ah‚Ä¶
  you think that‚Äôs right.
 There‚Äôs a real uncertainty as to what you want to do with your life.
 That is, your own real goal was not so much to have a career of your own, but to have a family and to be of help to somebody who was carving out a career.  Is that it?
  M-hm.  It had really hung on as your real goal for a long time and only more recently has it seemed not so likely, is that‚Ä¶.
  That doesn‚Äôt look like a very exciting prospect.
 It sounds sort of funny, but really and truly you feel....  ... you don't see much in just working.
 The life of a working woman just seems awfully narrow and petty and not very wholesome.
 You felt that just to please them you put on a front, but actually you were getting more and more bored and disgusted with the whole setup.
 You were dong so many things that were just the proper thing to do or seemed to be the right thing to do in the circumstances, that within a lot of that you really weren't being yourself.
 And though you're not too sure whether it was your real self, at least there were a lot of things that you were doing then you are pretty sure were your real self, at any rate,
 Your smile isn't a smile from the inside, is that it?
 You seemed to really give the impression of always being the goodnatured jellyfish or something of that sort, and when you did exert yourself, they were really shocked.
  Often keep your thoughts to yourself, rather than expressing, them in a situation.
  Mhm. The is at that time you took kind of a, or expected sort of a submissive role, when really perhaps you could have contributed more to the situation. Is that ah‚Ä¶
  You've been pretending satisfaction you didn't feel and and ah, not admitting wishes and thoughts and opinions that you really may have had.
  You're not quite sure what that, leads to, but it leads to a fact of your past experience.
 M-hm.  You're not really sure that you really want, or what you'd choose to do even if you could choose anything.
 You find it rather hard to know how to take a first step on that problem.
  You don' t know whether looking at the past would give a clue or whether some other lead would be better.... ...you just don't know.
 You really had been trying to build a really good physical foundation for parenthood, and ah, it was quite a shock to find that that seemed to be ruled out for you.  And I take it, you felt it just didn't seem to be in line with the way things should operate.
 Mhm. It seemed that it was kind of a shabby reward for the real effort you had put in to, trying to build up physically, is that it?
 You really felt you had gotten a very dirty deal from nature.
 You feel, I take it, that the hurt of that has tended to wear off, but perhaps after that happened, it really wasn't replaced with any other purpose, is that ah ....
 It seemed it wasn't an awful lot for life to give you, and ah, to have that turned down, that was‚Ä¶ it really hurt.
 You feel as though you did have a, a real desire to get on with the degree, and work toward it.
 It really doesn't cross your mind, and you're not quite sure whether you pushed it out of mind or not. Is that ah....
 As far as you're aware, you've really forgotten the situation, pretty much.
 You feel you've sort of accepted it from different angles, ah‚Ä¶
" M-hm. But you do realize is that it sort of hit you, ""What the hell have I been doing all this for?"""
 Whether that spread to other areas, you just aren't quite sure.
 It seems to you that it, being defeated, or disappointed in that ah, one thing shouldn't have set you back for a long period of time.
  Mhm. As long as it was a part of of ah, oh, getting ready for life, then it was interesting new things but to see that period over, it ah, doesn't seem as though it was worth trying things.
 You don't know whether what's needed is a clear goal ahead of you, or or just what.  I see our time is up. Ah, you want to come in again, Friday?
  How goes it?
  You feel that there must really be a, a real defect in you, that you haven‚Äôt been able to cope with these things.
  They‚Äôve been able to meet things that ah, seem fully as tough as what you‚Äôve had to face, and they have somehow weathered it.
  That is that perhaps you don‚Äôt have ah, as much capacity for integration as some people do, is that the, ah, sort of thing that you mean?
   You ought to have been able to adapt to it, somehow.
  You really evaluate yourself as being kind of a weakling, in that respect.
  You feel somewhat annoyed with yourself that here these other people have met situations just as bad as yours, and somehow weather them without being hit too hard.
  You think you sort of over-do that comparison a little.
  That is that this comparing yourself with others is something more ah, recent.
  That is you feel that you ‚Äì in one way you want to change, but also your own evaluation of yourself is that you‚Äôre not putting in a great deal of effort on that.  Is that‚Ä¶
  M-hm.  You feel kind of confused, as to how you could go about making any reorientation that would amount to much.  Is that‚Ä¶
  Where before, ah, when some of the circumstances have changed, you see why ah, why you improved, or felt better after.
  That is you took a step in that direction and thought that would kind of clear things up or put them back on their former basis, but instead it‚Äôs ah, slipped back again.  Is that‚Ä¶
  That is, that looking at your behavior, you can‚Äôt help but feel that it looks as though your were just trying to punish them, but ah, I take it that you don‚Äôt feel sure of that in yourself.  That is, that it looks that way, at least‚Ä¶
  Makes you wonder if you might, in some way, be trying to punish them.
  That is, you haven‚Äôt quite reached the goal that you wanted, of being independent, but still, ignoring them isn‚Äôt really the goal you were aiming toward, either.
  It seems as though, emotionally, they don‚Äôt matter.
  Whereas before you were so central in the family relationships, and now if they weren‚Äôt in the picture at all it could be all right with you.
  That is, that sort of thing ought to cause you real pain, you feel, but it doesn‚Äôt.
  In other words, as far as you‚Äôre concern goes, is whether this has shut them off from some of their usual interests.
  In other words you can see the whole picture intellectually well enough, that perhaps you‚Äôre putting them under more strain than they were under in regard to your brother.  But, ah, still you don‚Äôt feel like taking any steps in regard to it.
  You‚Äôd really be unfair or dishonest or something to work him for money.
  Because of the way you‚Äôve let things go, you just feel that you couldn‚Äôt honestly ask him for money.
  That is, you don‚Äôt see how you could break the silence now, is that‚Ä¶
  Theoretically you could just write as though it were more or less casual, and it would probably be O.K. as far as they were concerned, but within you, you find that the old habits and ways of doing things have really been interrupted.
  You can‚Äôt just pick up as though nothing had happened.  Is that ah‚Ä¶ part of what you mean?
  You somehow have to pay for what you‚Äôve done, if you were to resume relationships, is that‚Ä¶
  You felt that taking it would be taking money under false pretenses.
  You‚Äôll come out of it, but you won‚Äôt like it.
  You feel you‚Äôve been on the receiving end, but you really haven‚Äôt been‚Ä¶ made your contribution.
  In all three of these ways, you‚Äôve been taking and taking but you feel not, not repaying, in any way is that‚Ä¶
  It becomes sort of a settled way of adjusting, is that it?  That you keep sitting back and letting others do for you.  Is that‚Ä¶
 M-hm. It ought to have a stimulating effect. Instead it doesn't have at all.
 Previously you took up the cudgels when things were bad, but ....
 More recently you're just withdrawing from the demands of ordinary life.
 So that even coming here, which looked like an active and planful kind of thing, might really have been a part of this same seeking of shelter.
   You might have been hoping that this would be a substitute for your primary goal at the time.
 You could see your life as you had planned it.
 You realized that earlier, at least, you really didn't want, at all, the advanced degree kind of thing, which would really oh, set you apart from what, you thought was a normal life.
  You were just at the point where, ah‚Ä¶ you felt that you were getting to the spot where you felt you could live out some of the things you really wanted to do, and didn't have to plan so much - it was really mapped out for you, more or less. And that was...scotched.
 You might have more of a desire to lean than you've admitted to yourself.
  M-hm.  M-hm.  Perhaps one of the things you looked forward to in marriage was that there would be a situation and a person on which you could basically depend.
  So that you didn‚Äôt want to depend on your family, but still perhaps you were tired of being ‚Äì of exerting independent effort, and were hoping you could, ah, depend on someone‚Ä¶ ‚Ä¶ in your marriage.  Is that it?
  That is, you were quite willing to take responsibility and a second role, if you felt someone was the primary person, is that ah‚Ä¶
  If you knew you had backing, you could take responsibility.
  It bothers you that you don‚Äôt see any  any nice pattern in it.
  You aren‚Äôt sure in your own mind whether you‚Äôre really making progress, or not.  Sometimes you think you are and sometimes not.
  You feel you ought to be going deeper and that perhaps you‚Äôre not putting enough effort into it to go deeper.
  Feel you‚Äôve been talking off the top of your mind when it should have been coming from deeper somewhere.
  Hard to know isn‚Äôt it?  I think all that I know is that people who work along as honestly as you seem to be trying to do, have a good chance of getting somewhere.
  That is talking about it makes you less fearful of your own attitudes and of what you've done, is that ah‚Ä¶
  You think you can accept a little more some of the things you have done.
  Time doesn‚Äôt seem to make the same demand on you that it used to, is that it?  I mean, you feel you had to get something done when it was ah, demanded by a certain time, but now, that doesn‚Äôt seem so urgent.
  From going to one extreme and having too much concern perhaps, to one where you don't have any healthy anxiety about ordinary obligations.
  That is, intellectually you have all the facts, but they don't seem to ah, have the meaning for you that that day will really arrive and that you'll have to produce it on that date, is that ah‚Ä¶
  You knew the elements of it, but it didn't seem like a real reality to you ....that it would happen.
  It‚Äôs still true.
  Kind of unreal, is, that it? The passage of time and the handling of that problem. Is that...
  You've always felt that there was hardly enough time and you've had to utilize every scrap of it to get your things done. And that's quite different from your present attitude.
  You feel that right now you really waste a great deal of time that you actually can't afford to waste.
  That is you realize that it isn't any lack of experience or knowledge, in how to utilize your time, that you really know.
  There's a very sharp difference between the way you used to use your time and the way you do now‚Ä¶ the way you fail to utilize your time is that it?
  In other words, you just let your time get used for purposes that don't mean very much for you, is that what you mean.
  You don't ....you haven't been able to see any real reason for that, which ah ....
  You've been able to see causes in some things to a certain extent, but as far as ....
  It really annoys you somewhat to be using time so ineffectively.
  You wonder if it's part of a general falling to pieces of your, oh, ability to do things, eh?
  You feel that it might be somewhat the same you that it has always been only now, for some reason, you don't respond so much to the external demands for getting things done on time, and so on. Is that ah... It might be that the earlier doing of things on time was just ah, not so much in yourself, but responding, to what others ...thought ought to be done.
  Perhaps it all hung together in one piece of trying to satisfy others rather than have some strong set of internal standards or values.
  That is you find, for some reason, you don't particularly give a damn any more about the standards that others set, and yet you really haven't replaced those with any ah, anything you would be sure you want to stand by, is that it?
  The feeling there that it's not one thing or the other.
  You feel that isn't too wholesome a state to be in.
  That is, in some ways, you feel within yourself kind of a readiness, to, to do some launching out, to do the things YOU want to do, in the ways you like to do them. But you feel.... held back, is that it, by, by a lot of it that‚Äôs gone before. Is that what you mean?
  It' s really woven a whole network of what other people expect, all around you to a point where it's awfully tough to get out of that network. Is that it?
  In other words, doing something about it would involve accepting the fact yourself that you haven't been up to expectancies of others, and also letting them know that you hadn't and really didn't intend to, is that it?
  You feel that somehow others have got to know what your attitude is toward their expectancy and have really got to face that before you can move out on your own .... a little more independently. Is that it?
  You feel it would involve a very definite sort of honest feeling of integrity if you were to try to let them know that you hadn't measured up in certain things, and that you don't expect to ... that kind of thing.
  You think that if you accept the actual situation more deeply, in yourself, then perhaps you wouldn't be quite so worried about what they might think in regard to the situation.
  In other words if you keep comparing back with what ah, ah, you were sometime ago, then there's always that comparison. But if you can accept more fully your present situation, then you might be able to understand it better and perhaps move forward better. Is that‚Ä¶
   You don't know whether it would make it more difficult or less difficult.
  M-hm. That is, if it has been pretty much the same self all the time, then it would demand a fairly sharp redrawing of the picture you hold of yourself.
  You feel that's the direction you‚Äôre thinking is taking, but you‚Äôre not  sure whether you‚Äôre happy about it. 
  M-hm. Not too pleasant to look at, but you feel as though maybe it has been a crust of maturity over what was really immaturity, and that ah, in situations where you've found yourself you‚Äôve always been able to get along on that veneer basis.
  You really feel that ... there's nothing you have in mind.
  You do your thinking as you go along in here.
  That is, you feel most of your thinking in between times is either over what we have covered or over things that, after all, you'd better not ....  ....bring up, and so on, rather than ah .... rather than your thinking carrying you forward. Is that ah....
  It's not something that you can look at straight, alone.
  It really requires a large size job.  It implies a rebuilding of your ways of attention.
  I wonder if I understand that, is it that possibly being mature might be considerably more painful than acting as if you were mature, is that ...
  You get all the profits without the expense.
  You'd really be out there with the wind blowing around you, hmm?
  Perhaps more of the satisfactions would have to he inner ones, rather than all, the satisfactions coming from the approval of others.
  M-hm. It would be satisfying to see yourself achieve the things that your self had planned.
  Seeing yourself live out yourself might be satisfying.
  You feel you could plan it, and you feel you could do it, but you still feel that it's still artificial inside. Is that‚Ä¶
  You're not sure how to, how to tie up the real sense of conviction about it with, with doing something about it.
  You feel that that is an awful separation .... between what you know and what you do.
  You really wonder whether you can tie together what you know and what you do ... and, and I'm not sure I understood, but I take it you feel that, you certainly couldn't do that unless you were pretty deeply sure of what you wanted to be. Is that . . . partly what you were...
  If you once start growing in the direction of maturity then perhaps some of that assurance about what you should do and be, and so on, would develop.. I see our time's up.  Do you want to come in... oh, ah, I was going to say Friday I'm going to be out of town.  Ah, is a week from today too long a time?
  All right. If you should want to see me before then, call in and I'll see if something can be done. Otherwise let‚Äôs say Monday? O.K.?
 It might just be the pressure of external circumstances, but also you're raising a question, internally, ‚ÄúWhy can't I decide what to do and do it?‚Äù M-hm.
 That is, you feel you're not shooting awfully high, but somehow you have a kind of a premonition that you'll complete the work in, in reasonable satisfactory fashion. Is that‚Ä¶
 You feel that actually you are in the process of doing something about some
 You feel, then, that rather than just withdraw into your room and worry about the past you really have been going out and doing something about the present. Is that ah‚Ä¶
 In other words, you're not satisfied with what you've done, entirely, but you feel you have taken one step at a time, and have been able to see Prof. A____ even if you didn't feel at that time, able to see Mrs.______
 That is, it seems silly to you that things like this would seem like achievement, is that it?
 It's hard to believe there would be any feeling in you that would block that.
  That is, the world of thinking and the world of living are a little more nearly
 You can look a little more at the past without being overwhelmed by your
 You feel that on the one hand you're not living up to all the things you really should be doing, but on the other hand, you feel that it's more realistic to grow gradually into that. Is that‚Ä¶
 You're wandering if you may be fooling yourself in that area.
 That is, you've really chosen to draw away from the group you're just thrown with by chance, and you pick people whom you want more to associate with. Is that it?
 You find it a little more possible, I gather, to express your real attitudes in a social situation, like wanting to go to lunch or not wanting to go to lunch, and also to, ah, to make your own choice of friends and people that you want to mix with.
  It's a slow process‚Ä¶
  M-hm. In other words, you've tried to be self-critical in order to see if you're just running away from the situation, but you feel really, it's an expression of your positive attitudes.
  That is, you've played a little bit with the idea of doing something about meeting
 You feel up to this point you've gained from some courses, and haven't gained much from others, but all in all it's been a little  disappointing, whether due to the courses or to your own lack of wholehearted effort or what. It was not too good. That's why you wonder if some more of same would ah, be very attractive.
 That is, having these various ah, smatterings, makes you wonder whether going ahead in course work might not just seem to you like here's some more of this same old stuff. Is that ah....
 You feel you haven't gone deeply into some of that, but still you feel as though you had had a part of it before.
 You don't find anything in any of it that really calls you forward into looking more deeply into it.
 Sometimes even beforehand you know what's coming and it fords up before he's even said it.
 You feel that's kind of a vicious example because you didn't actually know
 You feel that in that instance, really your own attitudes in it are, are somewhat unreasonable, but you have them.
 Maybe you've been getting just spoonfuls here and there rather than really digging in somewhere rather deeply.
 It really begins to come home there's only, only one person that can educate you.
  ....a realization that perhaps nobody else gives you an education.
  Fright?
 Fright. That, that is a scary thing. Is that what you mean?
 Do you want to say any more about what you mean by that? That it really does give you the symptom of fright?
 Hardly part of you
" ‚ÄúWell, for goodness sakes, did I say that?"" "
 That is, do you mean that saying something of that sort of gives you at the same time, a feeling of, of strength in saying it, and yet at the same time, a frightened feeling at what you're saying, is that‚Ä¶
 You feel that it's something deep and strong, and surging forth, and at the same time, you just feel as though you'd cut yourself loose from any support when you say it.
 Sort of shakes a rather significant pattern, jars it loose.
  You feel kind of a dawning conviction within yourself that you're perhaps beginning to get some things done. And you haven't felt quite so concerned recently about procrastination, because it doesn't seem to have quite the same compelled quality. Is that‚Ä¶ I mean you don't feel quite so much compelled to live up to somebody else's standards.
 At least you can visualize yourself doing somewhat better. 
 You feel it isn't just making yourself do things according to a schedule, but you
 I see our time is up.
  So you've been sort of making a decision about what direction to go and about what to do next quarter, and about financial support,  and evaluating your present courses, and so on.
  In other words, taking quite an independent and orderly procedure in working on that problem has really turned it from a chore into being something quite exciting.
  That would give you confidence in other areas too.
  So that on the one hand you can't help but still feel bothered that you didn't use the year better, and on the other hand if you had gone through the year on a sort of  false basis, you would have had to meet this sometime or other.
  If I get that, you've sort of been shaking hands and getting acquainted with your real self, and you find that your real self has some idea about where it wants to go.
  There are still some real problems and real puzzlements in your picture.
  That is, you feel a large part of the situation was, a method you had adopted in attacking situations.
  In other words, there are still a good many things to be done and some of them quite heavy burdens, but you don't feel quite the same way about it. Is that what - it doesn't seem so overwhelming?
  You can only do what you can do, huh?
   It‚Äôs kind of strange and difficult to explain, but anyway you do feel more able to go ahead.
   Mhm. Mhm. That it isn't just a question of being able to drive yourself to do so much  but more of an inner feelng, uh, that gets things done, is that what
  Such things may be small, but they mean quite a bit to you.
  It makes you feel really that you've made quite a shift.
 You just feel they have taken an awfully good attitude on the whole thing is that it?
  Mhm. It bothers you that they might be over concerned or over sentimental, is that it?
  Mhm. Just don't want to be smothered in a cotton blanket of affection is that it?
  Up to this point you don't have any criticism of them on that score, but you're a little bit afraid of what might happen  when you go home, is that it?
  You feel a little bit resistive to the kind of affection that they have shown or that they might show, although you realize that quite a lot of the situation may depend on the way you react to it, is that what you are saying?
   In other words, if you can keep the picture of yourself that you are beginning to  evolve, it will run okay, but if, if you get tobe the lost sheep returning to the fold,  then, uh, that's another thing.
 In other words, you can't help but fear that they might be too overconcerned again, but keep coming back to the point  that if you seem to be quite independent they'll respond to you and respect that.
 That is, that you will be primarily responsible for the kind of relationship that it is.
 I take it you feel from your past experience in other situations that they'll, they'll probably measure up to whatever tone you set, is that it.
  Sort of weighing the good and bad elements rather than just being swept off your feet by the fact that here  might be a chance to get married, is that it?
  In other words it might be a temporary, uh, mood on your  own part, but at least at the present time it doesn't seen quite so necessary to get married in order to have someone to lean on,   and you feel a little more able, if necessary, to go on without someone to lean on.
  It's not that all your values are bound up in that one pattern, it's still a desirable pattern, but you can see others, is that it.
  Absolutely nothing new in the idea, and yet somehow this time it really meant something clear down deep.
  Let's see if I understand that. That is, initially you sort of felt that if you got a Ph.D. you would be a walking encyclopedia and pretty much a finished job  Now you feel that if you, get a degree there will still be room for growth, uh, in learning afterward, and even if you don't get a degree there's plenty of opportunity to continue learning is that, uh, -
 You feel you were - it was kind of an artificial view of the situation.
 In other words, you just sort of accepted it more as one step in a process rather than just the final finish of something or other.
  Don't feel as though you are compelled by so many inexorable forces.
  Mh. It isn't any fun to feel driven.
 Plenty of little things to be ironed out, but still basically you feel more normal.
  Mhm. It seems you really, are leaving behind to some extent that withdrawing kind of reaction.
  Just that in some way you may have been a little resentful of the dependency that was implied in a scholarship and, the fact that it puts your life to some extent in the control of some other group of persons. Is that it?
  It may not have been very sound, but at least it was there.
  That is intellectually you have always accepted the fact that of course, you make mistakes, but somehow now you really accept it and can recognize that you might be right or you might be wrong on some points, is that what you mean.
  Mhm. Mhm. That is you don't feel that what has happened in the past is quite so horrible but just the fact that you did at times make mistakes and will probably make some in the future.
  Not quite so overwhelmingly bad for awhile.
 Plenty more to do but you feel very much differently about your ability to do it.
  I guess our time is about up for today.
  You aren't quite sure but you almost feel that from here on in you could paddle your own canoe, is that it?
 OK. You just say how you'll like to leave it. Of course, however you leave it, if
    I tell you what I might do, I'll sort of save this time next week for a few days,
  OK. And then sometime fairly soon, we'll probably ask you if you can give us some time and come back and spend some time with the psychometrist.
  I haven't inquired, I don't know anything about that.
 All right.
  Well, I. don't know
  I really would like to know any of those things that you care to talk about.
   You really just hid yourself away.
  In a sense they gave you something to do.
  Decided you were too tough.
  Really settled down and planned carefully.
 You sort of kept
  You feel that each time
  circumstances just sort of shepherded you back.
  It seemed that way at the time. Now you realize that
  Mhm. At that point you went into complete seclusion.
  You feel you were awfully close to it at that time.
  You feel you really would have been classified as very abnormal.
   You couldn't stand it to be in contact with people.
  You felt that in sense you would welcome that.
  Fitted in with her story too.
  You really were a very disturbed person.
  You felt you really proposed it more as a rationalization for your behavior in the exam.
    What was that?
    You had the desire and the impulse, and even the plan of how to get help.
   You wanted help, but you were fearful of just becoming a pawn in the situation.
   You felt it was asking for pain.
 Just disregarded all your social contacts;
  Just to plan ways of cutting yourself off from all communication.
  The thought that we thought something of you, at least regarded you as a human being, meant somehow
 That is  distance would have touched you while her interest didn't.
 Mhm. I've forgotten. Did my letter give you an appointment, or did you phone?
  Oh, you mean, would I like you to write them down, you mean?
  Well, certainly your telling them to me now is just as good.
  Well, you canyes, we can do either of those. I have perhaps a little more time now than you have.
  Well, we can do this then. Would you want to come in again, and
  About a week from today. Think you can make it?
  I see. It could even be later if you'd want.
 No, there's been no change that I know of.
 That was when you went home at Christmas--- was that after you completed counseling? I forget.
 Mhm.
 You mean it meant more to you?
 It gave you a deeper experience of their real acceptance of you.
 Come home bearing banners, as it were.
 That is, you felt the reason you didn't feel smothered was that you were looking at the situation and reacting in the situation somewhat differently,
 You sort of saw your difficulty, your earlier difficulties with the family, in him, but at this time saw them more objectively because they were in somebody else.
 In other words you could recognize their attitudes and their wishes for you and so on, could see that they had a reasonable point of view on that, but it didn't smother you nor control you.
 You really sort of are up to your age.
 You picked your weak spots and put in effort on the things you felt you needed to get through.
 You weren't conscious of any tension and yet you did develop symptoms.
  That's the only thing that you sort of  over, thinking that shouldn't have happened.
 Accepted your sickness and really did go to bed, hm?
  Sort of facilitate social  relationships.
  You felt you were well looked after?
 Shut people out?
  All in all, you felt it was a sharp, very sharp contrast between the first and second exams.
 That's very interesting. Uh, I guess that-- I think that certainly covers that angle of it, and I think there are one or two things that I'm curious about. Do you find, that you think, you - much about the counseling interviews that you had, or not? That is just straight curiosity---
 In other words, obviously you're saying your behavior is different. Now do you find yourself thinking about those, or are those definitely in the past?
 If I get that correctly, then you're feeling that you've either shut it out, or that it is very much present with you- it's just that it's something that happened quite -a while ago, and you've forgotten large blocks of it.
 In other words, the main residue, as it were, in your memory, is simply that feeling, that kind of a warm feeling somehow is tied up with the fact that you feel you are somebody of worth. Is that it?
 You just haven't had that fear.
 You are more spontaneous, and sometimes you are actually aware of it and sometimes not, but at any rate you are more spontaneous.
  Well, that's all very interesting, and very helpful to me.
 Well, yes, if you are---it can be arranged on a time basis, I think it could be interesting to us if you'd be willing to repeat those  same tests.
 No, I think that would be quite all right.
  When do you get through out there?
  Yeah. Well, suppose if you think of it after you're more free and would make an appointment with Mr. ____, he'd be glad to give you these.
 If you forget, we may jog your memory.
 Okay.
 Well, we would appreciate it.
  Sounds as though the, the fear of not knowing where this might go . . . and the fact of your being in charge of the direction, . . Both of those things are really scary.
  It really does say something about the, the deep fear you have of initiating something entirely on your own.
  Mhm, how do you understand that? That in dealing with the external world, uh, you're quite willing to take initiative and uh, and organize things and so on, but when it comes to revealing your internal self, then that becomes much more frightening.
   I did know that.
  So when I said it was a risk, that's an understatement.
"  I catch that sense of being cheated,  but I'm also interested that you used the term that you have to ""structure"" your life. You use a term like that rather than ""create"" a life, or ""build"" a life. I don't know whether that has any significance or not."
  And that does bring a real sense of loss even to think about that.
  So this interview is a part of the whole sense of being lost.
  And the same carries over to the interview... a little bit.
  Mmm, .... I don't have that trouble, I'm perfectly willing to wait until you know what you wish to say...................
"  Mhm, I, I wonder if you aren't sort of experiencing that sense of being lost right now ""What the hell do I do?"""
"  After you've said ""hello"" and told a little bit about your life, where do you go then?"
  That's the essence of it, that you ought to be entertaining or you ought to have something well in mind. The notion of just being‚Ä¶ that doesn't seem possible.
"  I think I see in your eyes a sense of ""Please, please guide this!"""
  Do something.
"   ...""Why the hell don't you do something?"""
  It's hopeless, you can't change our relationship.
  You haven't tried it yet.
  So you really are, in a sense, dealing with your father in dealing with me, and yet it's with a different father who is more willing to accept.
  It makes it very hard to know how the hell to relate to me.
  You really just don't know how you want to deal with me.  Whether to be in a rage or ... or what. .......And the one point where I somehow felt you, was where you were talking about the difference between your relationship with your father, and this relationship.  I felt then I was sort of in touch with you. . .
"  And so if I don't respond to you, you feel, ""He must be judging and disapproving..."" Just like your father."
  And I guess I'm sensitive to the fact that you feel I'm not responding to you?
  The fact that I might be sensitive makes it twice as hard. It makes you feel I guess it would be a lot simpler if I judged you and . . . disapproved of you and . . .
  Or controlled you, or structured the thing. But to find that I'm simply sensitive to whatever you are, that's rough.
"  It gives you a taste of something that you feel is impossible... really. ""I can't... there is no such thing as sensitive men."""
  Unsettling, it sounds like.
  Mhm, and it's part of what's frightening you is there's a chance of real closeness I feel that, too
  That there's a chance of real closeness ......................
  So what is there to be afraid of? Sensitivity for twenty minutes, and then that's all? And it doesn't mean anything?
  Mhm, that's what's so awful about having a taste is that then you can be so disappointed about what's out in the real world. ......................................
"  Mmm, . . . well perhaps if you could accept what is good and sensitive and enriching for what it is, without feeling, ""Well, but it doesn't last forever, and it's.. so it's no good."" That's something you would wish for in yourself."
  I can sense that sadness and pain, and I feel in touch... myself.
  It isn't enough. Does it also feel just artificial?  Or real?
  So am I. For me it's real, too............................... ..............................................
  I'm not sure I got all of that. It's harder to sit here and be and your body wants to do something. But to run away or just to be active?
  To be more active.
  Do something about it.
  Do you speak for yourself?
  The emotional hyperactivity...
  ...is the old friend?
  Old friend of yours?
  And I could sit here for a long time this way.
  I don't know, it's taken me a long time to learn as much as I have, and I haven't learned too much yet.  ......
  And you wish I would teach you...
  Condition you for it.
  I get the feeling you'd like me to give more to you that would help you along that road.
  You wish there would be more rules that would keep you from having to struggle so much for what you learn...
  Mhm, it looks as though that it's been a very hard struggle to teach yourself all of those many things............
"  It's one of the ways you've been.. you feel cheated.  ""Why hasn't the world helped me more to learn the things I needed to learn?"""
  This is the sample of your life, just struggling, struggling, struggling to learn . . . with what you feel is an unsympathetic world.
  Maybe I know something about struggling alone, too.
  So you're seeing some new elements there.
  I appreciate that. I see that our time is about up, too.
 What I would suggest is that we both sit here for a minute or two and sort of digest what's gone on and then perhaps you'd be willing to share with me and with the audience some of what you felt, and I'll try to do the same. But first it's only fair to just sit and digest things for a minute or two. Is that alright?
  As usual, I trust people more than I trust machines.  I'll be glad to say a few words about my reactions in this interview, and then uh, I hope Vivian will be willing to share some of her reactions. After the first moment or two, to tell you the truth, I was completely unaware of the audience. Uhm, I felt I wanted to catch the meanings that were real to her. And she can say whether I was successful or not, but at least my own intent was to really sense what some of these words meant to her. Uhm...
 And, as I've told you before when we arranged the interview, we can go on if you feel you'd like to, as long as I'm here.
 The rebel who wants to be guided.
  One thing you said that touched me, too, is that you were very much aware of my presence and uhm, I realize I don't know how to be present to a large struggling workshop group. When people start to listen to each other, then I know how to be present. But when chaos reigns, I suffer along with everybody else. I'm present as a sufferer, but I don't know how to be present in any other way. And so I can quite understand your feeling where the hell was I when all the chaos was going on. But I guess the only other thing that I would say is that to me the relationship seemed very real, that it opened up one or two small new doors that you hadn't quite looked into. And that it was just a taste of what might be.
  Thank you for being willing.
  Ok, anything more you want to say?
  Well, it's interesting, that's the one therapist's tool that no therapist can get along without is Kleenex. I don't think I have anything further to say. Except that I hope that what we were together will have some meaning to others, but I really... In some deep sense, I don't give a damn what meaning it has to others. It had meaning to me in the moment. And if it has meaning to them, ok, good, if not, ok, that's life. But I do hope that.. I'm sure people must feel critical, questioning, sympathetic, objective, analytical, all kinds of different ways. And I hope they have a real chance to share all those attitudes and feelings with one another. So, for whatever it was worth or not worth, I think our contact here is finished. Thanks.
 And I will be willing to see you more if you would like. And I think you may want to escape from this room as much as I do, I don't think you like the big crowds...
 Okay.  Whatever you want.
 Ah, that possibility scarcely comes to mind.
 Screen it to see if/ it would ‚Äì would this seem important to somebody else.  If so then‚Ä¶
 Sound like a while back  seems like an old beginning.
 Way down deep there‚Äôs sort of‚Ä¶trying too hard some way‚Ä¶
 ‚Ä¶why, why‚Ä¶    there isn‚Äôt anything you‚Äôre aware of‚Ä¶consciously striving to do, but‚Ä¶
 There‚Äôs something alike in the two feelings, and the second one is frightening feeling‚Ä¶I may‚Ä¶shift on you somehow‚Ä¶ You‚Äôre not too sure that I wouldn‚Äôt‚Ä¶do something that was frightening‚Ä¶.
 A feeling kind of came over you‚Ä¶Carl couldn‚Äôt be continuingly patient and the fact that maybe I shouldn‚Äôt be coming anymore or‚Ä¶ so and, this is the day, maybe next time is the day when bingo‚Ä¶ I will somehow be thrown for a loss the feeling too that that ties in too with other areas
 Would this be putting it too strongly, sort of a feeling‚Ä¶ah‚Ä¶I‚Äôm going to be let down some time, at some point he‚Äôs not going to‚Ä¶like me or so on.  It‚Äôs only a question of when‚Ä¶
 Couldn‚Äôt ever really conclude this or relinquish‚Ä¶
 Still seems just as hard to feel what I feel and express what I feel‚Ä¶as long as that exists, there‚Äôs no‚Ä¶
 Is it as though, ‚ÄúI could never let myself really be‚Ä¶a very little boy‚Ä¶?‚Äù
 This says something, to be sure, but whether this is the meaning it really has, or where it fits at all‚Ä¶
 You can say something that you‚Äôre not at all sure of, and it still‚Ä¶seems safe
 ‚ÄúI just‚Ä¶I‚Äôd like to hear this record‚Ä¶           but, ah‚Ä¶that‚Äôs all‚Ä¶‚Äù
 Just rolled, never even any fortresses to break down‚Ä¶
 Somehow you experienced very vividly, and very deeply, the relationship that you have with her as good and enjoyable.
 At that time you just couldn‚Äôt take those in, it sounds like.
 Because you are experiencing the same kind of thing yourself ‚Äì Would this catch anything of what you‚Äôre saying.  Excuse me for interrupting but it‚Äôs the feeling I have.  The experience this morning sounds as though you are appreciating her and the relationship for what it is and it‚Äôs good whereas before the way you describe it sounds more as though well, yes ‚Äì here she is ‚Äì and the relationship ‚Äì but it isn‚Äôt what it might be maybe there is something wrong with it.
 Before you felt as though I should be a happy father ‚Äì this morning you are a happy father ‚Äì
 It isn‚Äôt so much a matter of developing a topic or carrying it on from one interview to the next but if you can experience pretty fully this thing that you wanted to bring up ‚Äì while we are talking about it, that ‚Äì
 Outside something will hit you with real force as very real or important ‚Äì good or bad ‚Äì either positive or negative.  But in here often there‚Äôs the feeling that you can‚Äôt get into that or can‚Äôt bring it to life the way it existed outside, as though you sort of dampened ‚Äì something in here sort of dampened you down.  Is that the way ‚Äì
 You mean in a sense you won‚Äôt ever come to an end, because here you are expressed in all kinds of forms and ways and yet you feel as though that must somehow become organized ‚Äì you question whether you have what it takes to ‚Äì to organize that ‚Äì is that ‚Äì anywhere near it ‚Äì   -- so that there‚Äôs the feeling of helplessness ‚Äì 
 How could it possibly be that yesterday you were feeling great competence and confidence and so on, not only yesterday but a good many other times, yet coming in here, clear to the other extreme ‚Äì helpless ‚Äì inadequate and ‚Äì how could such diverse people be contained in the same frame in 24 hours ‚Äì huh.
 So that here you almost feel as though you were back in a cocoon kind of and not even  ‚Äì the relationship with me doesn‚Äôt even seem very vital, it seems as though it‚Äôs really just you ‚Äì  ‚Äì and yet such a ‚Äì helpless and inadequate ‚Äì you.  Is that in any way related to this confident self you kind of have to admit you seem to be outside of here?
 Maybe you‚Äôre the only one who could ever sense fully this ‚Äì cold ‚Äì depressed ‚Äì inadequate kind of worthless person ‚Äì 
 So that when you come in here you find times, recent times, when it feels as though you are letting yourself way, way down.  And there‚Äôs some kind of a struggle involved.  In part it seems to be ‚Äì  ‚Äì how long can I stand having a person like that here, how long can I be patient with this ‚Äì somebody that ‚Äì other times it seems as if the struggle was partly in you.  It just seems ‚Äì are you going to look down and down into that shaft or are you going to look at the light ‚Äì up above?  But when you try to tell yourself well ‚Äì you have good feelings and bad and so forth ‚Äì after all ‚Äì kind of compromise the thing ‚Äì it doesn‚Äôt seem as though that‚Äôs the way the chapter ends.    Or at least if it does, it ends in a kind of superficial note.
 You feel it just has ‚Äì it must have its own rhythm ‚Äì its own time and ‚Äì you can‚Äôt hurry it and when it comes it‚Äôll come from inside in a way that ‚Äì  ‚Äì it‚Äôll be quite clear ‚Äì it wouldn‚Äôt be a superficial ending of a chapter.
 I feel in some way that that was an ‚Äì expression of what is ‚Äì deeply ‚Äì bad ‚Äì   deeply buried within you ‚Äì way down at the bottom of the shaft.
 It‚Äôs hard to let it come out.
 I hate to interrupt your own thinking yet I‚Äôd like to ‚Äì it has a lot of meaning to me too ‚Äì I mean here‚Äôs this absolutely undeniable kind of experience last night ‚Äì of a vital confidence in yourself ‚Äì in the wholeness of yourself in that relationship and the fact that you have something to give ‚Äì and that there‚Äôs an artistry to what you do.  Not on a conscious level, but that there‚Äôs something good to give and you do it well.  And how in the world could you possibly have that experience last night and be clear down to the bottom of the shaft this morning.
 I can‚Äôt help but wonder if ‚Äì  ‚Äì here you experience the height of you and the depth of you ‚Äì and you can‚Äôt hardly believe that they both belong to the same person.
 So ‚Äì within a few hours you can feel so complete ‚Äì so ‚Äì so whole ‚Äì really you can‚Äôt put that in words ‚Äì the words don‚Äôt do it justice ‚Äì and almost at the same time you can feel so ‚Äì low ‚Äì and down ‚Äì way down ‚Äì that words wouldn‚Äôt do that justice either ‚Äì really can‚Äôt ah ‚Äì 
 Whatever you are at any given moment it seems as though you are more fully that ‚Äì more freely that.
 OK.  
 This is a taste of what you‚Äôll really like‚Ä¶
 A sort of special meaning‚Ä¶
 ‚ÄúToo rich for my blood‚Ä¶‚Äù
 It‚Äôs just like you‚Äôre running away from something, it seems to be‚Ä¶
 You can think about, you can put it into words‚Ä¶and yet none of it seems to catch‚Ä¶whatever in the world it is here you want to‚Ä¶run away from‚Ä¶and yet want to do.
 Whatever it is you want to do‚Ä¶or want to experience‚Ä¶maybe‚Ä¶
 He just feels tiny‚Ä¶and shriveled and‚Ä¶helpless and tense and aware of his helplessness‚Ä¶
 It isn‚Äôt indirect flattery to me or something‚Ä¶it‚Äôs a very real feeling of, ‚Äúhow could anyone possibly be interested in the prattle of this‚Ä¶little‚Ä¶helpless‚Ä¶contracted‚Ä¶‚Äù
 ‚ÄúSurely, there‚Äôs nothing there that anybody could really be interested in‚Ä¶‚Äù
 Is this what you‚Äôre saying, that at the present time you can‚Ä¶with difficulty to be sure‚Ä¶ah‚Ä¶look at this little‚Ä¶helpless person and feel‚Ä¶that that‚Äôs a part of you, where before you couldn‚Äôt possibly have done that but that you need an awful lot of safety to take that look.
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Mhm. And does it cause you more distress than it used to, or is that no different?
 Mhm.
 Mhm. Mhm.
 A feeling of real pain, is that what you mean?
 Mhm.
 And you say that you feel this does block you in a good many areas of life?
 Mhm.
  Mhm. So that both in your work and in your recreation you feel blocked
 You just feel rather unable to do things, is that it?
 Mhm. And you, in spite of the difficulty that it causes you, you feel pretty sure that it isn't physical?
 Is that so?  Can you tell me about any of those times?
 Mhm. So that you feel that it goes and comes absolutely beyond your control.
 At those times you wouldn't have any of this feeling of pressure or distress.
 You feel that's some kind of a clue to it.
 So that in that situation, you're not at all sure that you'll be free of this feeling, or free of difficulty.
 But, I mean, that may or may not happen, where as I understand it, in what you described as a voyeuristic situation, you're pretty sure there that…
 Well, you've thought of that yourself as a clue. Do you have any notion as to what that ties up with, or what the origin …
 When was this, you say? What grade? You said something about the grade you were in.
 I see.
 Mhm. You've analyzed this thing quite a bit as to various aspects of it. Can you tell me any more of your thinking about it? You say that you feel this is perhaps the origin of it.
 So that you feel your folks are somewhat the basis of some of your difficulty?
 Whatever you've done hasn't worked enough to free you from the problem, is that it?
 Then you've simply lived with this for quite a number of years. Why is it any worse now, or why are you trying definitely to do something about it?
 You'd rather be dead than live as you are now? Can you tell me a little bit more about that?
 Yes.
 Well, can you tell me in any more detailed way what  - in what way it blocks you so much that you really feel sometimes that you'd be better off dead?
 It really just cripples you as far as anything else is concerned.
 Mhm. It just makes you more or less half a man, is that it? And only half able to do your work
 When you feel all right - you feel very much all right.
 And what you want is to find ways of increasing the amount of time that you have that dynamic self, is that it?
 Well, I think possibly one way of doing that might be to talk somewhat more about the ways in which it does block you, I mean, what - in your work, for instance, and some other things.
 Well, possibly not. But you feel that it really prevents you from doing anything that you might wish to do?
 Plenty of energy there, but it's just lost in the balance.
 You say those feelings mean a good deal of conflict. Can you tell any more about those?
 You feel that if you were at your best, your abilities and achievements and all would really be topnotch.
 Mhm. And then there was a time when you couldn't even do that?
 And tell me, what sort of thing stopped you from writing - I mean, if you could do it up to a point.
 And gradually this feeling grew to a point where you couldn't write?
 I see. Well, then, perhaps it became focused more on writing.
 So that gradually that circle has grown until everything you might want to do is within that circle of blocked activities.
 So that the satisfaction you get from voyeurism almost the only thing from which you're sure at the present time that you can gain satisfaction?
 Appetite is still good. Mhm.
 Well, I think that the sort of thing that perhaps we can do in our discussions together is to explore this thing pretty fully, uh, find out what it means to you, and why it has blocked you in different situations, and gradually see if we can find ways of dealing with it. I think that's the…
 That there is some what?
 There is a feeling you have a certain tendency to cling to this, even though you don't like it.
 You feel that conceivably if you wanted wholeheartedly to get rid of it, possibly you could get rid of it.
 Yes. Mhm. But you say that at times you do sense a certain amount of tendency to cling to it. Can you say any more about that, or times when you felt that?
 Part of your problem is to discover who and what are the enemy in your own home.
 In other words, you haven't been able to reason yourself out of it - nor has anyone else, is that it?
 In other words, you feel that nobody could persuade you out of this situation.
 In other words, if you felt that gradually you had enough confidence, and so on, in me, I might be able to bring about some change in you, but you couldn't very well do that by yourself.
 You feel that you've got this thing fairly well analyzed; you realize it is a balance of power within yourself…
 Yes. I think you do have a remarkably good intellectual analysis of the situation, and you feel quite rightly that you can 't lift yourself by your bootstraps. It's possible, though, that as we explore this thing you can at least decide clearly whether you want to vote the same way you're voting now, or whether there may be other ways of…
 Can you, uh   not today, but one question that you may want to be thinking over is, what are these negative votes?
 I think we might get further if we talked about it in specific terms. You say you like to dance, for example. And still this thing crops up there, too, and blocks you from enjoying dancing. Well, can you tell me more about that? I mean, what your feelings are while you're dancing, or what it is that seems to…
 Mhm. You like the rhythmic expression, you like the musical aspect of it.
 You like to consider the philosophical implications of most of your ideas, don't you?
 You really do like that?
 Mhm. And when you're discussing philosophical issues, what about this problem of blocking - free from it, or not?
 Defend yourself a little bit that way?
 So that in that particular situation your blocking keeps you from being your best and fluent self. And in that situation, it's speech blocking that is primarily…
 Mhm.
 If you could express yourself as well as the others, you would be as good or better than they are in the discussion.  Well, what other aspect of this whole thing comes to your mind?
 And, I gather, feel very much discouraged about it.
 And you feel quite confident within yourself that…
 So that up to date your whole life situation is simply that you would be really outstanding except that this blocking keeps you from it. And then, too, as you say, you feel that to some extent you keep that blocking there in some way.
 You know you're licked before you start to fight?
 Mhm. Mhm.
 Mhm. A steady grind. And yet in spite of that steady grind, you feel that you - you still feel you may find your way, or fight your way out.
 Yes. What sort of achievements do you fantasy about?
 So that you have a generally high…
 So that you, minus this blocking, would really go places.
 Mhm.
 Well, it is significant. You have your own   you say you have your own standards and it's by those standards you gauge what you do…
 Well, you've given me quite a good all-round picture of your situation. I think, probably, that's as much as we can do in one session.
 Well, now, I'd put it this way, as to the way we can go at that. I think that the best way to work through some of this is for you, when you come in next time, to take up those aspects of it about which you feel the most concern or which are disturbing you most at the moment. Maybe it will be the sexual aspect, maybe it'll be something very different from that. Whatever the thing is that is of greatest concern at the moment, let's work that through and explore it. Perhaps we can find out what some of these negative votes are. I mean, if you can get a little clearer feeling as to what this balance of power consists of - why it is that in some ways you wish to keep this painful problem, then we'll be further along.
 Mhm.
 Mhm. All right, that is helpful. That's one value that it has to you - that it enables you to - while you have your problem, bad as it is, it does give you one certain type of satisfaction that you can't get…
 Mhm.
 That's why you feel perhaps less guilty about that.
 … and less fear of punishment …
 Yes. That's an excellent statement. Well, let's consider various angles of that next time you come in. Now, we should - I was looking over my calendar just before you came. I could see you next Tuesday at four o'clock. Would that be a convenient time for you? I thought perhaps we might try to work in a couple of contacts next week, I'm not sure that I can make them as frequent as that later on.
 If it can be arranged. Mhm.
 Well, let's say Tuesday at four and Friday at four.
 Is that feasible, or not?
 Well, then I'll put those on my calendar.
 Both at four.
 Okay, we'll see what we can do on it.
 Well, how are things today?
  Things were really worse?
 You feel that part of that is due to the fact that some part of yourself is probably resisting any change?
 What makes you feel that?
 At any rate, you feel that the conflict is, if anything, sharper than it was
 You feel we're threatening it, that is, it's something sort of outside of yourself, isn't it?
 You don't really claim any ownership of the problem that you have?
 Then it's the neurosis that resents any attack on it  not you that resents any attack on the neurosis?
 Well, I was just interested  you seem to be saying that it's the neurosis perhaps resented the fact that we were trying to change it.
 And you evidently feel pretty sure that that's the situation rather than that you might inwardly be resisting the possibility of losing it?
 No, not really.
 I just wondered if there was any significance there.
 Have you had some reason to feel that that might be so?
 Mhm.
 And you like to see in rational and intellectual terms every possible angle of this, don't you?
 Everyone feels, but you like to think about feeling.
 Well, I told you last time, you could figure on using this time in the way that seems most meaningful or most helpful at the moment. What are some of the things you'd like to –
 And to go out and face whatever is involved in these jobs is  seems like a little too much at the present time?
 You couldn't at the present time face that kind of a situation.
 And it's that that you would find awfully hard to face I mean, that attitude on their part?
 I don't think I quite understand that.
 In other words, you feel somewhat fearful about meeting some of these situations, and quite sure that if you did go out and meet them, things would happen to make it that much worse, is that it?
 It's a pretty distressing situation if you do try to fight it openly.
 So that at present it seems the bettermore comfortable way out to sort of drift along.
 Mhm. At least you do get some satisfaction out of
 More satisfying than staying at home, but not completely satisfying.
 But they do resent your inactivitywhat seems to them to be inactivity?
 So that, from their viewpoint, you're both lazy and wicked, is that it?
 Are other attitudes involved there, too, on their part?
 Well, I was wondering, do they resent the fact that you're not aggressively going out after jobs and so on, too?
 Mhm. That's one of the things that makes your problem more acute. You've got to have money, and still the things that bring money are among the things that you hate to face.
 I understand that it's simply a conviction that it is a fear it isn't that you feel fear?
 Fear comes out in the open more?
 Well, I think that the more significant elements are what you experience, not what you think intellectually it might be. I mean, if you experience fears in your nightmares  that's something. Any amount of thinking about whether or not it might be a fear is –
 Mhm.
 But more recent nightmares aren't nearly as specific as that?
 You're afraid of something, but not entirely clear what, even in your dreams  is that it?
 That would be natural.
 A good many things can happen in that realm. I think that it's your own experiences and feelings that really determine what direction it does take. What raised some of those questions in your mind?
 Well, that is, I wondered what were some of the experiences or feelings that raised those questions in your mind?
 I notice both in regard to your mother and your aunt, you describe simply their reactions.
 And in any case, you prefer somewhat to think about the reactions of others or the intellectual aspects of the situation, rather than your own
 But you had no real part in that, except as they made you a victim, in a sense?
 You feel that it's your mother's reaction to that, and so on, that
 And you feel that because she rebuffed any sex feelings that you had toward her that –
 You feel that she's jealous of any normal reaction
 And without particularly holding a feeling of blame, yet you do feel that
 For you, you feel it's almost too much, is that it?
 You can put up a pretty good front, and maintain pretty good spirits.
 I gather that you feel that now you're somewhat fighting yourself by those activities?
 At the present time you have to carry it on to prove something.
 Well, I might be wrong on that.
 Makes you feel pretty good for the time being.
 Mhm. But that quite definitely isn't enough – I mean, that momentary kind of enjoyment isn't what you want?
 Not too long.
 Yes, but you're very sure you don't want permanence?
 Mhm. At any rate you feel that you're as much responsible for that affair not going further as she was?
 And you're not quite sure, I take it, whether you really do want permanence?
 Mhm. You feel quite sure that you couldn't really satisfy her because she doesn't fully satisfy you.
 At any rate, that's the way you feel.
 In this case, neither of you must have full pleasure out of it. Is that what you mean by vicarious inhibitions?
 Oh, I see.
 Perhaps it's because they're absolutes that you're somewhat fearful of looking at them.
 I do. That is, that -
 Nevertheless, your feelings tend to prove your parents are right.
 While you fight them somewhat in your actions, yet you feel, you say, that they were right and you were wrong.
 But that doesn't alter your experience.
 Mhm.  So that adds to your feeling that you're sort of trapped in this state of development, or state of feeling.
 Faith in what?
 That's true, isn't it? And in a number of these things, that's where you feel blocked. For example, you know the jobs are there and they could be managed, and so on, but to have the confidence that would send you out on them, that's a different story. The same thing in the sex realm, as I get your feeling on it  other people enjoy sex, it is a normal thing and all that, but  there's always the but that keeps you from developing that confidence in yourself.
 The truth for you is that these things are painful and terrifying and that unless you can find some basis for faith or courage or something of that sort -
 Yes, that's where you feel you've come to a full stop, and that somebody else should to some extent take over.
 That's right. Now I think that's a pretty satisfactory way of looking at it, and the thing that still seems to elude our grasp somewhat, I mean, I noticed that although we've covered a lot of new territory today, we've come back to somewhat the same issue we were up against last time  what are some of the negatives? Well, you've defined that more  we're sneaking up on that  but I think that is our problem really. As you say, some of these things that have past origins are likely to be kept in the present primarily because they have some  some use to us.
 Yes. Mhm. Quite right.
 No, I think you've given quite a clear picture
 Mhm.
 The negative forces in your personality probably won't let you turn the spotlight on them, particularly as long as you regard them as something quite outside of yourself.
 Well, you'll make a good deal of progress as you can turn the spotlight on those negative forces.
 Some, yes. Yes, I think that's true.
 Well, you cast all of them on an intellectual plane. I don't think there's any aspect of your life that you indicate you would be fearful of looking at intellectually.
 Yes, or in another frame of referenceyou might be quite willing to look at this job situation quite coolly from an intellectual point of view, but the feelings which  on both sides of the balance toward going out after the job or staying home and recoiling from it  those are more difficult to face, I think.
 Yes, your own
 Well, I suspect that our time is about up for today. I think that you're putting your finger on a number of things there that are highly important. And it is going to be a question of you say your feelings are blocking yourself can you look at them? Can you really consider your own reactions  not an intellectualized abstracted picture of them?
 Well, let's
 Sometimes he doesn't own them.
 No, I guess that wasn't quite my notion. There's always a chance that they might not be aliens at all  they might be citizens right in your own country.
  You're not going to own them, eh? 
 Well, I think probably I'm pushing you a little too hard on that, too. At any rate, let's explore into this situation further and see what some of the values are that it does seem to hold for you.
 Yes, that's -
" In other words, right within yourself there are the feelings that  ""Oh, well, let's not do anything about this, there's nothing to it anyway."""
 And, of course, one reason for that no doubt is that, as you pointed out yourself, you feel -
 I think you can have such a diabolical cleverness. 
" That's right. And both of those parts of you are just as real as any individual or any person. I think that's the thing that strikes me – that you're just as much the person who writes down those things and who swears, by gosh, you'll get rid of this or else; and you're also the person who says, ""Let's not  no use going into this thing too deeply."""
  That's a good one. 
 Well, perhaps so. Let's see if we can take up some of those things next time. Now let's see, we said Friday at four.
 Well, let's
 No, I can't. I'm tied up tomorrow and -
 All right.
 Well, how goes the battle today?
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 You feel that perhaps it is a part of you after all.
 Mhm. And has that  you'd again like to look at all the intellectual aspect of that has that made any difference in your  feeling about things, and so on?
 Mhm.
 Well, particularly not since you do feel quite strongly, I think, that there are pretty diverse forces, or forces working toward diverse goals, as far as you're concerned. You can't pretend more unity and more satisfactoriness than is there.
 Do I understand that you really wanted to get to work on that?
 That really means something.
 And that makes you feel pretty good, I presume?
 Something makes it different flow?
 That sounds like quite a step.
 You could have gotten along without doing it.
 Sounds as though there must be more of a story behind that.
 Mhm.
 Then, of course, that fluctuation is something very, very real, isn't it? I mean -
"  you have courage enough, and it must have taken quite a little to decide, ""I'm really going to do something about this,"" so you came in to see me. Then  as you were saying last time  then on the other hand, you sort of trick yourself out of making use of it sometimes by feeling good in advance, and all that. I mean, you do fluctuate, but certainly there are very definitely the two parts of your motivation, very closely balanced."
 Any other things that have happened, or other elements that you want to talk about?
 That's an excuse. And that adds to your feeling that everything's going pretty well today, eh?
 Yes, you feel that you tend to punish yourself, perhaps, by some of those feelings?
 and you make yourself miserable, in a sense.
 Mhm.
 That greatly torments you.
  Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Do I understand that you feel that in your case it torments you, but it doesn't tend to make you aggressive, is that it?
 Mhm.
 But you feel in your case that that very definitely isn't true  I mean that -
 Well, and you feel that way many times, even when you have no real evidence of her promiscuity.
 Mhm.
 You feel that has a pretty direct and important relationship to your whole pattern, don't you?
 Yes, I think so, too. You like so much to talk in rather general or intellectualized terms about some of these things  I mean, about fidelity of women in general, and so on, that it is perhaps a little hard to see what some of those connections might be. Can you cast some of this more in your own frame of reference, in regard to your own experience, and so on?
 It's different for them than your own feelings toward them?
 Yes, that does help a little. In other words, you do get a good deal of  you get a more comfortable feeling that you have dropped the girl than you would if she had dropped you.
 Keep yourself fairly clear from getting deeply involved in any emotional relationship?
 Well, I wonder  can you tell any more about why you feel it would hurt you so if you really became involved in one of these affairs and then it didn't turn out too well?
 Mhm.
 At any rate, what you're saying suggests, or I get the feeling a little bit, that these affairs and so on have given you quite a sense of achievement, in one respect. I mean  that you can attract most women; you can get them interested in you, but your own interest in them is pretty definitely limited to
 You feel that you're a skilled artisan or a skilled musician in that sphere -
  but you mustn't become too deeply involved, either.
 You feel that if you were healthier, you could take it as well as dish it out, is that it?
  be more adaptable.
 It's pretty hard for you to assimilate even these imaginary infidelities.
 Mhm. You don't feel quite sure of yourself in that kind of a situation,
 Again, a part of that, I take it, is the fact you just would find it awfully difficult to take anything that struck at your ego that you would feel humiliated.
 Deeper, but along the same line, is that it? I mean, that you feel that there really is something quite basically wrong with you  this is just one relatively lesser manifestation of it?
 That's one of the reasons why it strikes you so hard if there is  if you have some doubt or some uncertainty as to your own abilities along those lines.
 In other words, you've got to have some respect for yourself on a pretty fundamental basis, in order to have any achievements in any line.
 Mhm. You feel that somehow you've failed to give it the proper balance that it should have, somewhere between food and music, is that it?
 But, as I gathered it from last time, when some opportunities come along for possible real love, you have tended to avoid them.
 Mhm. You feel you just wouldn't have a great deal to offer to a great love, perhaps.
 You want to, but nevertheless, you have a little concern over whether you could pay the price.
 How would you put it?
 And that has some parallel in your feelings about other things, doesn't it? I mean that, here you are at your present status, and way up here is the ideal as you would like to see it, in regard to job or love or any one of several different things.
 And that  any bridging of that gap seems pretty hopeless.
 Mhm. Well, I guess our time is nearly up for today. Just before I came in, I looked over my calendar, and I'm not sure whether it conflicts with your plans or not. The next hour I had down was Thursday at four.
 No, I try to avoid that. But it might be possible.
 I think that might be possible. How about  just happened to think of another thing  would Monday at five be a possible time for you, or will you be tied up then?
 Monday at five would be all right. All right, let's make it Monday at five, and I guess probably we'd better settle these as we go along, anyway. We won't try to set another time.
 I'll sort of tentatively save Thursday at four, but we'll see -
 All rightfive o'clock'd be O.K. 
 I think you're definitely making progress, and the kind of thing that has more significance to me than some of the intellectual and philosophical aspects are the things that you do in the realm of  feeling and action. I mean  I'm interested that you had guts enough to go talk to this fellow this afternoon and so on. And it's as we discuss
 Mhm.
 And it's some of those things that -
 Oh, sometimes I do, but I often find it doesn't mean very much.
" Yes. I might make this kind of a suggestion  that when you find your symptoms rather bad or leaving you I mean either way, when they're coming on or leaving you  the more honestly you can ask yourself, ""What's this getting me?"" the more progress you might be able to make."
 Mhm. Sometimes that
 Well
 Well, I think that  well, we'll see  we can talk that over. I think that has somewhat limited therapeutic value.
 It has a lot of influence on various elements
 Is that so?
 Mhm. O.K.
 Mhm.
 You feel that would be just more than you could take.
 Mhm. You've found it quite upsetting to you?
 Mhm.
 And do I gather, too, that things about your business that have been hard for you have been those that would take a good deal of initiative, and yet faced with the opposite situation where little or no initiative would be needed, that seems even worse, or seems much worse?
 But even that difficulty, as I get your feeling, doesn't make you want the lack of independence that you would find in army life?
 Mhm. In other words, the thing that strikes you worst about it is the possible regimentation and having somebody else order your life.
 Mhm.
 You really felt that you were doing some things you hadn't done before?
 What sort of things?
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Mhm. And as a matter of fact, those two meanings of the word this are your whole struggle, aren't they? I mean  whether to hang on to this, or whether to take the second this, that leads toward -
 You feel that is a feminine role, or a more childish role, or something of both?
 Let me see if I get what you're meaning there in other words, when you're faced with something  I'm not quite sure whether the blocking is that there is something pretty difficult in this masculine role, or whether you're referring to other kinds of blocking at any rate, when you're blocked in being a man, you tend to fall back into a possibly more feminine kind of satisfaction  certainly a more childish kind of satisfaction, in voyeurism.
 Yes, I think I get your meaning there. I wasn't quite so sure that I did get your meaning in regard to the type of blocking that would throw you into that, as it were.
 That is, you're now talking about it again back in  what it might have meant to you then.
 The role that you have when you are successful, and the role that you want always. And  I don't want to push you on this  perhaps you didn't make it plain  perhaps it isn't plain in your own mind, but I'm not quite clear as to whether you felt some certain type of thing tended to block you in that masculine role, and therefore causes you to make use of these other satisfactions.
 And you feel pretty sure that it is still the fears and so on, engendered by Puritanism, that tend to cause you to take these
 You could almost  as I get your description of these various things  you could almost say that any time that you endeavor to play a thoroughly masculine role in the economic world and in the sex area, then you draw back into other satisfactions.
 Perhaps you're not entirely sure, yourself  or haven't been in the past, how much you really wanted to play a masculine role.
 That is  do I understand  your symptoms would be worsened and so on, in that kind of situation?
 Mhm.
 In other words, anything that makes you feel somewhat insecure, or somewhat inadequate, could bring on or make worse those feelings?
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 That makes another comparison that's hard to
 Mhm.
 Well, let me raise a question with you there, about some of the things you've been saying today. It would appear that the negative feelings you have  or these symptoms tend to operate to give you more of a childish kind of satisfaction or feminine kind of satisfaction and they make it a little unnecessary to be fully responsible or fully masculine
 Or fully adult.
 Well, of course, one reason why it is a struggle from some of the things you've said  is that you get satisfactions both ways  I mean, there is a good deal of satisfaction in battling the thing through, and there's also a satisfaction on the other side of the fence.
 Well, or put it this way that if the neurotic satisfactions  if you want to call them that  were the only ones that you actually found, there'd be no reason for being ever anything but that. But the fact that you do get satisfaction in working on your job, and in contacts with girls, and so on, even though you don't get those satisfactions all the time, they continually draw you out, and then when difficulty comes you drop back.
 Mhm. That would make it easier to slip back than to go forward.
 That's one reason why your coming in here to see me and to see about this whole thing, I think, has a lot of significance, because  in other words, that was a part of your decision as to which way you wanted to go.
 Surely. You had twentyodd years that, theoretically at least, you might have
 Even at that time you did have -
 Mhm.
 At any rate, enough antagonism developed, at least, that it just didn't work out.
" Well, I think the thing that is most significant to me about that whole experience is that there have been  at the present time, and also at certain times past  there have been instances when you felt, ""I'm going to cast the balance in this direction."""
 Mhm.
 That was one of the first realizations on your own part that this wasn't all something imposed on you. I mean, part of it was that you wished to hang on to some of these symptoms.
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Mhm. Mhm.
 And a good many uh  difficult choices. I mean, evidently the situation has always been -
 Mhm.
 Mhm. Mhm.
 That brings you up to the present, where you -
 At least a part of that key, in what you're saying today, seems to lie in a pretty clear recognition of the choice that you are making. I mean, you certainly have brought out much more plainly the contrast between going ahead, which involves responsibility and involves both satisfactions and dissatisfactions, or slipping back into the easier possibility of simply living with your symptoms.
 Yes, that's a good way of
 That's right. That's  uh  you talked when you came in the first time about the fact that here was this picture, now, where could the motivation come from to change it? Well, a large measure of the motivation to change it comes from that much clearer recognition on your own part of what aspect of this whole situation you wish to preserve on a permanent basis.
 I don't know whether it's as a philosopher, but 1 certainly would agree with you that, in situations of this kind, I don't think there is any proof that could be advanced that would prove one set of values rather than the other.
 It comes right back to the naked self pretty much, doesn't it? Here are two general roads; which do you prefer? It comes right down to a personal and probably quite unphilosophical choice.
 You can, and some people do, but it's doubtful if that is what really settles it.
 Mhm.
 Nothing wrong with your understanding of yourself when you let it loose.
 Right.
 The ones that you most deeply want. I think that it is a real choice, and different individuals take different roads. There are, as you know, certain satisfactions connected with, well, with evading life, with building up things that make it unnecessary to go out and fight some of these battles and assume some of these responsibilities and so on. Some people choose that road. On the other hand, there certainly are satisfactions connected with the tougher road too.
 I think so too. To be quite frank with you, I think so too.
 No.
 No. I think  uh, I think your whole experience shows that it's a very close choice indeed, but probably with a number of indications in recent, uh  well recent elements of your experience that make it look as though you were deciding that balance. 
 Yes, you might be just kidding yourself.
 No, there's no  there's no getting away from the fact that it  as you mentioned yourself, it is a very real battle.
 Mhm. Mhm. That's right.
 Then if it didn't work out well, you could blame the cosmos too.
 Mhm. That's right.
 You're getting to some real issues there, and I think -
 Well, certainly I don't want to get off in theories of psychoanalysis, but I think our experience together would be somewhat typical  that the business of throwing light on the whole thing is somewhat mutual. But then the business of turning the key is up to you.
 Right. That is, I think there isn't much doubt you've touched a key today  the key being that question of what do you really and deeply want most to do  not just the superficial statement of what you want to do, but what -
 That's what I think too.
 Well, there's no doubt that you were right when you first came in that you had a lot to say today.
 And growing increasingly honest, I would say.
 Well, you raised the question last time whether I thought you were making much progress. I guess you wouldn't have to ask it today. 
 I'm tempted to say  you're damn right. Mhm. I think so. Well
 It isn't the kind of decision that comes all at once, or that is just a matter of saying so, either. I mean, there are things to work out in regard to it. But, to see it clearly, as clearly as you've seen it today is a long way
 That's right.
 That's right. That's why it becomes -
 Mhm. That's right. Well, let's see, did we we didn't set a time, did we? Thursday afternoon is possible for me  at four.
 O.K. M-hm. All right.
 You can call in here any time to change the appointment.
 Yeah.
 Good.
 How's it today?
 Mhm. In other words, as you face the thing rather squarely, the neurotic pleasures, as you call them, seem fairly appealing.
 Yes.
 
 Yes, I couldn't help but think of that. It seems as though just at the time when you're trying to decide a very difficult issue in your own life the world pops up and makes the growth side of that decision very much more difficult, doesn't it?
 So you're inclined to feel that war situation or no war situation, the struggle is pretty much within you, after all.
 Mhm. Mhm.
 Mhm. That is, you sound as though you had thought your way through fairly well to a decision, but the courage to take the initiative, that's pretty difficult.
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Those sound like very positive steps.
 Yes, I think that's very true.
 Intensifies both sides? I don't know that I quite get that.
 No, but we can feel the forces of them, all right.
 I should think you would have had a setback after our last talk.
" Well, you looked at yourself more squarely than you have in any of our contacts so far, and, as you pointed out several times, I mean, it left you facing a pretty tough decision. And I know I felt afterward, ""Well, you'll have a worse time after this chat than you've had after any of the others."""
 That's right. If you didn't gain more satisfaction out of confronting the treasurer with this idea, it would be foolish to confront him.
 The treasurer of the fraternity or whatever it was that you…
 I was thinking of that incident. Certainly there's no use going through the painful aspects of that unless it was more satisfying to you.
 I think so.
 Mhm.
 Doesn't seem as though our feelings are anything we can store up in a bank.
 Well, I think that's true of both bad and good, isn't it?
 In other words, you have the feeling that you have more genuine preference perhaps for the bad days than the good.
 What's your own feeling as to the answer on that?
" You seem to be saying, too, that to maintain what you call the ""good"" state, that's an uphill struggle at all times, whereas…"
 Can you tell of one of those times - I mean, any specific time when it happened?
 Mhm. Mhm.
 Then you feel quite strongly that you can't at any time put your finger on the thing that changes that feeling.
 In other words, you feel that attempts to trick yourself out of one of those moods fall pretty flat.
 Perhaps that is a misstatement there.
 Mhm.
 That's it. You feel that you've just tried every means that you could discover or think up to do something about the alien within your borders.
 And you're feeling quite discouraged today, aren't you, about your whole situation?
 Mhm.
 You feel somewhat that way at the present time, but not quite as strongly as that, is that…
 Yes, I suppose that different people experience their troubles in quite different ways.
 I don't think I'm the one that fundamentally throws you on your own. It's that nobody can pull a rabbit out of a hat for each one of us, can they?
 I think. I have, and I think you have, too. That is, it interests me that, while you're feeling quite discouraged today, and I think that's quite understandable, yet at the same time you're telling of doing things that sound to me like real progress.
" You're raising very much the question with yourself, ""Is it worth the battle?"""
 Mhm.
 Well, I think that's another…
 And again, you’re feeling there that it’s only by conscious struggle and battle that you win any ground. If you let yourself go, what you would really prefer to do would be to drop back into misery, to some extent.
 Mhm. Yes, you feel that the neurosis is nothing that you have any voluntary control over and therefore…
 Mhm.
 I think just as you felt last week that it's not very often that the specific intellectual key is the primary factor - sometimes you find it.
 I realize that.
 Mhm.
 That's right.
 Yes. You feel pretty confident that if it were in that specific realm, or some specific happening in the past, that sort of thing, that you would have found it by now.
 Yes. Yes.
 That's right.
 Yes, I'm inclined to be skeptical too that you can find the answer in a pigeonhole. I think it's more in the general realm.
 Yes, it comes back in either event, doesn't it, to the course of action that really gives you the greatest satisfactions of the deeper sort. That's the thing that's easier to follow, voluntarily or involuntarily.
 That's right. Mhm.
 Mhm. I think very definitely - I think your statement there is right. That if the greater satisfactions in the balance are the neurotic ones, we tend to stay neurotic.
 That's right. That's the thing you're building on, isn't it? That you do gain very real satisfactions that way. Just as…
 Well, I think you've answered it yourself very well. I mean that if the votes are very evenly divided, first one party and then the other may be in power.
" And I think that that is one of the reasons for your feeling as you do this week. I mean last time you took some awfully courageous steps. You looked at yourself very clearly, and saw very clearly some of the balance of power. Well, now if you do decide to follow one course of action, it tends to mean a giving up of the other. And this week you're saying, ""My gosh, I don't know - that's giving up quite a lot."""
 Well, I expect we'll have to discuss that next time.
 Those may be the ones with the real meat to them, hmm?
 In other words, if the environment would bolster you more, you perhaps could stay on the up side?
 Well, let's think over some of these things next time.
 Definitely. Now, I'm tied up next Monday. It would have to be either sometime Saturday, or Tuesday afternoon at four. Would that be a possible time for you?
 Well, could you make it Saturday at one?
 All right. Saturday at one.
 Yes, I guess we did.
 Yes, and to make the choice fairly deeply, perhaps, of the kind of satisfactions that you most want.
 That's right. That's right. That's right at the spot where you are at the moment.
 Hello.
 Got in bed at nine?
 I think you might be a little foggy.
 Here is a match.
 Well, is it the knowledge that represents faith, or is it the action based on inadequate knowledge that's an act of faith?
 Yes. I wasn't quite sure that I got your point.
 Mhm.
 In other words, it isn't any lack of knowledge that keeps you from going ahead, because you realize that would always be inadequate, but the not having quite sufficient faith, if you wish to call it that, to take the action, or the actions.
 Mhm.
 If it could be done by a miracle or all of a sudden, you don't doubt that you'd want the change made.
 You feel that would be the truthful -
 Well, I was thinking of it in another way, too. A person might be willing to press the button to get from here to there, but I don't know that that necessarily means that he would be willing to go through the struggle to make the achievement of getting from here to there.
 You feel, though, that you are pretty willing to take the necessary steps if you can discover what those steps are.
 Well, as you've thought about the changes that might be involved, what steps have you thought of, or what changes have you considered?
 I suppose.
 And you feel that it's -
 You feel that progress will come first by being rid of negative feelings, and then having success?
 You think that perhaps it might  the change also might come in the reverse direction  that as you work for certain successes the negative feelings would disappear?
 Well, I've been very much interested, for example, in the -
 Well, I've been interested in the steps you've taken in regard to your work, for example. I haven't gathered that all of those were easy, or that you always felt all right when you undertook them. But you have evidently felt quite good when you've achieved them.
 And that that type of satisfaction is hardly worth striving for.
 And you feel that the goal for you is a life without that type of struggle.
 Yes, I think so. And it looks as though it comes back to the notion again that if you could press a button and find yourself completely changed and cured, you would press that, but perhaps slower and struggling roads don't look so attractive.
 That's hardly adequate, is it?
 That didn't particularly help your speech, and yet, somehow, you overcame your speech defect, pretty largely.
 Do you imply that you still feel greatly bothered by a speech
 But you do it.
 In other words, in that area, you have made a good bit of progress.
 I presume that that progress was quite a struggle.
 Mhm.
 That's right. So the total results -
 Mhm.
 As I get from what you’re saying today, the other side of that picture also looks pretty unpleasant I mean, that the struggle to achieve a different level of adjustment looks like a pretty tough climb.
 So to some extent it might be easier to remain with your present dissatisfaction in regard to your condition rather than to make the even harder struggle to get somewhere else.
 Mhm.
 M-hm. M-hm. And at the present time you don't see from your own experience anything new being added there.
 Mhm.
 You feel that growth can sort of take place in a vacuum, and then once you have developed the growth, then you would be capable of dealing with the situation.
 Well, I don't know of growth taking place that way, but I can understand your feeling in regard to it.
 Mhm. And that seems also kind of tempting to you, doesn't it? To press a button, or to retreat from the situation and grow and develop away from it  any of those possibilities looks pretty good.
 Yes, I think that just pretending doesn't get one anywhere. I think that's true.
 So it probably wasn't worth it to make the unusual efforts that you did in getting the treasurer to advance you the money.
 So you feel that you got no inward satisfactions out of it?
 Yes, you're very much teetering on the balance, aren't you, as to which direction gives you the greatest degree of satisfaction that you want. I think that the more you've considered this, the more plain it becomes that there are certain satisfactions which you know you can gain through the type of behavior that you've shown for a long time; that is, you tend to escape from some of the most difficult situations through such behavior. You know, too, from your experience that there are certain satisfactions in playing a more masculine role  a more adult role, but as you weigh those and you see that it would be a slow, stepbystep struggle to achieve satisfaction along that line, I think that makes you hang right in the balance as to which you'd most prefer.
 Hm?
 Mhm. 
 Yes, you feel that the money you earn or that sort of thing, that certainly isn't the thing that would make the difference. In other words, if the satisfactions you gain in doing a difficult photographic job or selling yourself to someone or getting across ideas  if those satisfactions aren't real to you apart from the money they bring in, then they do compare unfavorably with the satisfactions that you find in avoiding that sort of thing.
 Yes, certainly. That isn't the aspect that's important  it's the way in which the –
 That's right.
 You're still hoping very, very much that someone can, first, make you healthy, and then achievements will follow.
 And if that state could come without effort, you'd accept it in a minute.
 At least they don't cure it immediately, do they?
 Well, I think I can see quite clearly how you feel today, and 1 think that  I wish there were some easy, offhand solution that could be given to that.
 Well, you do. You feel at the end of your rope  several of these expressions you've used here are interesting and truthful, I think. You feel somewhat at the end of your rope  you feel also on a plateau. You feel as though you've come to the point where probably you've got to go forward or backward  one or the other. You can't stay indefinitely on the spot.
 Mhm. Yes, probably that would be another possible outcome. You could avoid meeting the situation fully and just get along enough to get by.
 Yes, it looks kind of hard each way you look, doesn't it?
 Mhm. Seems very slow and very dubious to you.
 Mhm.
 Well, I think probably we'd better discuss some of that another time. If there was  if there were easy and quick answers  you do thus and so and you'll feel lots better - why, we could settle it now. But it's a matter of slowly working out the things that would give real satisfaction to you  noting your experience as you live it, and thinking in terms of what satisfactions you want to go on to repeat and so on  then you might be able to work out some kind of a road which  then you could decide whether or not you wanted to take that road.
 If they are so much more satisfying, then why not work on that basis?
 It is a tough choice any direction you look, isn't it?
 Yes.
 Mhm. Well, I think
 Mhm. Mhm. I was just going to say  I think that there is surely the possibility that you might wish to live by neurotic satisfactions rather than healthy ones.
 You can't quite decide whether to hug it to you or to leave it behind. And
 Now, suppose we consider that next time we get together and try and see what ways there are of developing that road.
  Well, it would be  it would always be pleasant if our problems could be solved at one fell swoop.
 Mhm. Yours stays with you at all times, hm?
 Well, I know you feel that, my gosh, I ought to give you some pills, psychological or otherwise, but I don't know that that's –
 You feel that you can't lose it through alcohol, and you can't shake it off in constructive experiences, and, in fact, you're feeling quite discouraged about it today.
 Well, let's talk over that whole angle of it. Now I have Tuesday at four or Friday at four.
 Tuesday at four? O.K.
 The weather today about fits the mood, hm?
 Another indication of the division within yourself.
 O.K. Tuesday at four, then.
 Still puffing a bit, hm?
 I see.
 You're wondering whether trying to attack one aspect of it would just make it crop up somewhere else.
 I suppose it depends on what the fundamental thing is.
 You feel you can't quite tell your selves apart.
 What you're saying  what you said a moment ago is part of your thinking about what you might do.
 I think it's both, and it seems to me that's a beautiful statement of it. That is, that each person  I don't care whether they're neurotic or not  essentially has to write his own prescription. I mean, if anybody could write it for him, why fine  why have him write it himself? But when you get right down to it, who knows what steps you can take and what steps would really improve your situation? Well, you don't know offhand, but no one else can tell you either.
 In fact, that's what you found happening in your own case.
" Mhm. You came to see pretty clearly that that kind of statement on your part last time was really another element in this balancing proposition, ""Do you want to go forward or do you want to go back?"""
 Sure. Absolutely. Absolutely. We find ways of putting into effect the things that we most deeply want to do.
 That's right.
 Right. Mhm.
  You gave yourself quite a lecture at the bar.
 Well, perhaps merely seeing it in relation to the goal. I mean, take some of the things you've talked about before  one of the things that interested me  it really was pretty swell the way you handled that fraternity situation on the photographic job. But if you look at that merely as some isolated incident  well, what's its value? If you see the relationship of that to going forward  to meeting real situations in a better way, well, then it has some value.
 That's right. It's just sort of lost and unimportant  that sort of thing, so I think a person should have a constant dose of actual situations.
 Mhm.
" Well and one point that might be helpful there too; a setback doesn't occur without some reason. It may be a silly reason  it may be a very minor reason, but something hits you that tends to make you feel, ""Oh, I'm no good  this isn't worth the struggle,"" and so on. And to"
 No, that's right  but often you can  if your purpose is fairly clearcut, then you can be objective enough to find what it was that set you off, I mean, what started this bad mood.
 Mhm. That's right.
" And if you can see it in terms of the specific incident that caused it, then it doesn't seem quite so overwhelming as if you just feel, ""Well, nothing's worth trying."" That's a general mood and feeling. But sometimes we can see it in terms of a specific incident, and it doesn't appear so important."
 Well, if it's all as good as what you've given, you'd better take time to figure it out. 
 Well, it interests me that you made the application, and it also interests me that you don't seem nearly as overwhelmed by the thought of the draft as you did earlier.
 Mhm.
 Doing a little evaluating of others' motives as well as your own, hm?
 And also, as you pointed out before, perhaps your earlier notion of doing something in a vacuum was really not too much a desire to make a resolve, but more a desire to get away from making a resolve.
 No, I think that  well we might be able to add details to it, but I think that that is the prescription that really will count toward more longtime satisfactions. I think you're right  it may be a hard road, may be a long road. But
 It's a road that you feel pretty well convinced now offers more satisfactions in the long run than the other direction.
 And it's quite evident that since our last talk there've been some fairly heavily weighted times.
 I suppose that's hard to say, and evidently you're wondering there how much defeat you could stand, for example.
 Where eventually, I suppose, your goal is to be able to take both success and defeat without being too much disturbed by either one.
 I don't myself see any hard and fast rule that would settle it.
 That might be true. You feel that the road to cure is all success?
 That's right. Yes, I wasn't quite sure how you were defining it. Yes, I think that the right road
 No, and the real success, or the real feeling of success, probably comes from being willing to do our damnedest, no matter how it turns out objectively.
 The storm may tatter the sails once in a while, but you could still have the feeling that it's a good sturdy craft.
 No, I don't. As a matter of fact, one thing I was going to talk about was just what we would do in that regard, because I'm going to be gone probably part of the next two weeks, during vacation.
 Yes, or at least I know when you could come again. We could have an appointment  oh, in the first couple days of next month. We could have one more on Friday of this week, if you wish.
 Very good.
 Well, this was no empty resolve, was it?
 Mhm.
 Mhm. And although you're determined get a little of -
 Yes, and I think your earlier statement is right, too. There isn't anything wrong with thinking in a vacuum, but real growth is much more apt to take place in contact with real situations.
 That's it.
 It's pretty important -
 Well, I think that you've done a real job of writing your own prescription. I think you'd better save that paper. 
 Well, the thing that one finds so much is that leaning on someone is such a deceptive support. I mean, it seems like a support only for a time, and eventually it comes back to the individual himself, just as he's -
" That's a good one. ""Dear Brutus"" seems to have done a pretty good job.  Well, now, I've got some other things that I have to do  I mean, I haven't much time beyond our usual hour, but we an get together again on Friday, if you like, at four. Is that O.K.?"
 And then at that time we'll set an appointment for early next month.
 O.K.
 Surely. Those things don't do any harm anyway. Well, I think that -
 So that it won't be entirely vacation, it'll be also -
 Mhm.
 Your own equipment is up in ?
 Mhm.
 I'm sure you would like that better.
 Well, not very long till vacation now, is it?
 Just a week, I guess.
 Mhm.
 That sounds like very real progress.
 Mhm.
 Then you're really finding a stepbystep type of improvement that you hadn't found before.
 And you have really earned it in more ways than one. I mean, you've earned it by making a pretty deepseated choice, and then you go ahead and earn the different satisfactions that come along too.
 I think there's no doubt about that, and my only question about that statement is that probably you've made it longer than it -
 Yes, you're almost at a point right now where you have changed your direction and you've discovered some new ways of tackling your situation, and that's almost  those are the fundamentals that you need.
 You wanted to sort of test out and see whether you really had changed as much as you thought you had.
 I see.
 Well, that's true. Mhm.
 Well, you're getting more -
 Mhm. That's true.
 And you're the one that knows really whether or not this particular experience was more in the nature of growth or more in the nature of an avoidance, and I would feel very certain that you know that you are reacting quite differently from what you would have before.
 No.
 Yes, they're likely to be  I mean, you can find a certain amount of fluctuations, to be sure, but I don't think it's the kind of road on which there's any basic turning.
 Mhm.
 And you've found it somewhat more satisfactory to do it yourself.
 Well, if they should get in touch with me, I'm afraid I shall just refer them to you.
 Mhm.
 Well, you can take that. I mean, if that's the thing that's satisfying for them to believe -
 And I suspect you feel that with some of the changes that you're making in yourself, probably things will go smoothly in relation to them.
 Do I gather that you have a pretty good chance of getting something there now?
 I see.
  What's more  you're getting into what will probably be a fairly challenging situation, but meeting it.
 Mhm.
 That arouses my curiosity. You say in a couple of weeks  does that mean you're not going to take your trip, or after you come back from your trip?
 Well, that sounds as though you'd made a good deal of progress, and you're laying quite a lot of sound plans for the future.
 You keep bringing these surprises in intentionally, I think. 
 No, I'm just curious. I mean, you hadn't mentioned any novel before. You're actually working on one, or just contemplating one?
 Good.
 Well, that sounds like - certainly like material for a novel.
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 You're really going to try out this new self of yours, aren't you?
 Well, that all sounds good.
 And now you're willing to take the chances that are involved in trying to really do something along that line.
 Well, I was thinking that perhaps before it was a little too much of a gamble for your selfesteem, and so on, and now you're more willing to enter into a lot of these things.
 Yes, I suppose that'd be one kind of thing. And even more than that, the willingness to make the actual attempt.
 That's right.  Mhm. Yes, the things that happen to you or some of the things you do may be the same things, but they can look very different when your own viewpoint is changed, or your direction is changed.
 Mhm.
 Yes, I think that's entirely possible, and I think too that you could face the fact of not being too famous if it worked out that way, because -
 Yes, that's quite true.
 They live by extreme fluctuation. Mhm.
 Well, it sounds as though today you're feeling pretty sure of your own progress and you certainly have taken a lot of steps in the direction of progress.
 Oh, yes.
 Mhm.
 Mhm.
 Yes, it does.
 And it can be depended upon in large measure because you're the one that selected the road and you're the one that decided that's where you're going to go.
 No, not at all. Matter of fact, it's my deepest conviction that I can't help you  I can't help anybody, but I can sometimes create an atmosphere where the person can help themselves.
" And the  you had gone a long ways in helping yourself when you  before you ever saw me, and decided, ""By gosh, I'm going to do something about this!"""
 Oh  I don't know. It seems to work, at any rate.
 Well, there certainly are many others. I think that a good many different people have been working toward somewhat the same point of view.
  Right. I'd be delighted to get it. Well, now, you're feeling really pretty confident of your own ability to handle this. I would like to leave the notion of further contacts up to you. That is, do you want to come in again or -
 I would feel that, too. And I shall be doubtful if you need others. Though, if you find that you want to come in some time next month  all right, call me, and I'll be glad to have you come in, but my guess is that you've got this thing pretty well where you want it and -
 Well, you see, there's been some progress along that line too.
 I think part of the reason is  I wouldn't pretend and you wouldn't pretend that your problems are all solved or anything of that kind  I think though that you have found the direction you want to move and the kind of approach that you can take to work toward that goal; and surely problems will come up  probably quite difficult problems, but I think that you're  you have the tools that you want to meet those problems now.
 I think that sometimes people have felt that this sort of thing should solve an individual's problems, and consequently, if you're going to try to do that, that does take years.
 That's right. That's right. There's -
 That's right. If you have a fairly clearcut notion of what you're working toward, then obstacles are just an interesting challenge to battle through or solve in one way or another. And life would be very empty without them, I think. Be like the old fashioned pictures of heaven  just golden streets and nothing to do.
 Yes. You have a good deal of insight into other people, I think, as it is.
 Yes. I was interested in the account of your novel. It had a good many
  Don't make it too identifying. 
 O.K.  Well, it's been very nice to
 Well, I always feel that I get something out of it, too.
 Very much worth while. Very much.
 O.K. And good luck to you.
